Information in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, is subject to
change without notice. The example companies, organizations, products, people and events
depicted herein are fictitious unless otherwise noted. No association with any real company,
organization, product, person or event is intended or should be inferred. Complying with all
applicable copyright laws is the responsibility of the user. Without limiting the rights under
copyright, no part of this document may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise), or for any purpose, without the express written permission of Microsoft
Corporation.
Microsoft may have patents, patent applications, trademarks, copyrights, or other intellectual
property rights covering subject matter in this document. Except as expressly provided in any
written license agreement from Microsoft, the furnishing of this document does not give you any
license to these patents, trademarks, copyrights, or other intellectual property.
© & 1997–1999 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.
Microsoft, MS, Age of Empires, The Age of Kings, DirectDraw, DirectPlay, DirectSound, DirectX,
MSN, Windows, Windows NT and the Windows logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks
of Microsoft Corporation in the US and/or other countries.
Developed by Ensemble Studios Corp. for Microsoft Corporation.
Genie engine technology © Copyright 1995–1999 by Ensemble Studios Corp. All rights reserved.
The names of actual companies and products mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their
respective owners.
0899 Part No. X04-78896
Chapter I: Getting Started
What’s new in Age of Empires II ............................................ 1
Installing & starting ................................................................. 2
How to play .............................................................................. 3
Tips for beginners .................................................................... 10
Options & hotkeys ....................................................................11
Saving & exiting .......................................................................11
Chapter II: Setting Up a Game
Game types ............................................................................. 12
Choosing a civilization ............................................................. 14
Choosing a map ....................................................................... 15
How to win .............................................................................. 16
Multiplayer games .................................................................. 18
Creating custom scenarios & campaigns .................................. 22
Chapter III: Building Your Empire
Putting your villagers to work ............................................... 24
Advancing to the next age ....................................................... 31
Researching technology .......................................................... 33
Chapter IV: Military Tactics
Reconnaissance ...................................................................... 34
Moving units ......................................................................... 35
Attacks .................................................................................... 37
Garrisoning units & relics inside buildings .............................. 37
Converting enemy units & buildings ....................................... 39
Healing friendly units ............................................................. 40
Ordering units to patrol, guard, or follow ............................... 40
Combat stances ........................................................................ 41
Formations ............................................................................. 42
Chapter V: Diplomacy & Trading
Choosing your allies & enemies .............................................. 44
Team games ........................................................................... 45
Sending tribute to other players .............................................. 46
Trading .................................................................................. 46
Chapter VI: Buildings
Economic buildings ................................................................ 48
Military buildings .................................................................. 54
Chapter VII: Units
Infantry .................................................................................. 59
Archers .................................................................................. 66
Cavalry .................................................................................... 73
Siege weapons ......................................................................... 78
Ships ...................................................................................... 82
Other units .............................................................................. 87
Chapter VIII: Technologies
Building technologies ............................................................. 90
Economy & trade technologies ................................................ 92
Infantry technologies .............................................................. 98
Missile/siege unit technologies .............................................. 100
Cavalry technologies .............................................................. 103
Monk technologies ................................................................ 104
Ship technologies ................................................................... 106
Appendix
Building Attributes ................................................................ 107
Unit Attributes ...................................................................... 108
Technology Costs & Benefits.................................................. 110
Technology Trees by Civilization ............................................ 112
Index 138
Chapter I
Getting Started
Age of Empires® II: The Age of Kings™ is a game of combat and empire-
building that spans the time from the fall of Rome through the Middle Ages.
You control one of 13 civilizations, which you build into a powerful empire
that strives to dominate other civilizations before they conquer you.
What’s new in Age of Empires II
Age of Empires II: The Age of Kings includes these new features:
13 new civilizations — Each with a unique unit and a team bonus.
New units — Including Kings, Heroes, female villagers, knights,
cannons, and exploding demolition ships.
New buildings — Including impressive castles and gates that automati-
cally open and close for you and your allies.
New technologies — Including Conscription (increases military unit
creation speed) and Town Watch (increases building line of sight).
Formations — Precision control of how your army moves and engages in
combat.
New multimedia campaigns — Unique music and more than 300 pieces
of original art enhance your game as you follow a soldier through battles
featuring William Wallace, Joan of Arc, Saladin, Genghis Khan, and
Frederick Barbarossa.
New ways to trade — Trade with other players over land and by sea; buy
or sell resources at the Market.
Learning campaign — Master the basics by helping William Wallace rise
from his humble beginnings to defeat the British.
1
Regicide game — Defend your King to win the game.
8 new map types — Including Arabia, Black Forest, Rivers, and Random, which
allows the computer to pick a surprise map type for you.
Garrisoning — Station units inside buildings for protection, healing, and surprise
attacks.
New combat features — Order military units to patrol, guard, or follow and choose
their combat stance.
Record and replay games — Watch your single-player and multiplayer games later.
Find idle villagers — Automatically locate villagers not assigned to a task using the
Idle Villager button.
New online tech tree — See what is available to your civilization and which units
and technologies you’ve researched while in the game.
Improved multiplayer features — Save and restore multiplayer games; lock the
game speed for all players; lock game teams so players can’t change alliance during a
game; signal allies.
Gather points — New units automatically gather at a location or garrison inside a
building.
Improved interface — Units behind buildings and trees are visible; the mini-map
has Normal, Combat, and Economic modes; chat interface is expanded; Help is
integrated into the game.
User profiles — Customize options and hotkeys and automatically save them from
game to game.
Online encyclopedia — Extensive histories of 13 medieval civilizations; background
on the Middle Ages, armies, weapons, and warfare.
Installing & starting
To install and start Age of Empires II
Insert the Age of Empires II CD into the CD-ROM drive, and then
follow the instructions on the screen.
If Setup does not begin automatically or if you have trouble starting Age
of Empires II, refer to the Readme file on the Age of Empires II CD.
2 Chapter I - Getting Started
How to play
The easiest way to familiarize yourself with Age of Empires II is to start with the William
Wallace learning campaign. You’ll master the basics of the game and learn about some of
the new features in Age of Empires II.
To start the learning campaign
On the main menu, click Learn to Play.
If you’re a new player, click Marching and Fighting, and then
play the rest of the scenarios in order. If you’re an experienced
Age of Empires player, you may want to start with Forge an
Alliance and The Battle of Falkirk, which provide information
about the new features in Age of Empires II.
An overview of the basics
In Age of Empires II: The Age of Kings, you command one of 13 medieval civilizations.
Each civilization has strengths and weaknesses that you use to your advantage to win. For
example, the Byzantines build strong walls and are a good defensive civilization. For more
information on choosing a civilization, see Chapter II.
Getting started
Random Map games are a common type of game in Age of Empires II. Every Random Map
game is different because the map is never the same.
To start a single-player Random
Map game
Click Single Player on the main menu, click
Random Map, and then choose the game
settings. For help choosing the Random Map
settings, hold your mouse pointer over any
item on the screen to display information in
the lower-right corner.
In a typical Random Map game, you begin in the Dark Age with a Town Center, a few
villagers, and a Scout Cavalry unit. Your goal is to build a powerful empire capable of
conquering enemy civilizations. You can see only a small part of the map; most of it is
black. You do not know where your opponents are. You build your civilization by
gathering natural resources, constructing buildings, creating an army, researching
technological improvements, and advancing from the Dark Age through the Feudal
Age, the Castle Age, and finally to the Imperial Age.
The first thing you should do is explore the map for sources of food and wood. You can
explore the map by moving your villagers and Scout Cavalry into the black area.
3
To move any unit
Click the unit, and then right-
click any location on the map
or on the mini-map in the
lower-right corner.
Stockpiling resources
As you move your villagers and Scout Cavalry, you discover sources of food (forage
bushes, sheep, deer, fish, wild boar — careful, the boar may attack!), wood (trees), stone
(stone mines), and gold (gold mines). Your villagers gather resources from these sites so
you can pay for improvements to your civilization. For more information about stockpil-
ing resources, see Chapter III.
To gather resources
Click a villager, and then right-click a forage bush or animal, tree, stone
mine, or gold mine.
The villager gathers some of the resource and automatically carries it to your
Town Center, where it is deposited in your stockpile (the amount is shown in
the upper-left corner of the screen).
Creating new villagers
Villagers are a vital investment at the beginning of a game. The more villagers who are
gathering resources, the faster your stockpile grows (and the faster you can build a
powerful civilization).
To create a villager
Click the Town Center, and then click
the Create Villager button.
After a few seconds, the villager appears near
your Town Center and you can order it to
gather resources.
4 Chapter I - Getting Started
Supporting your population
As your population grows, you must build Houses to support it. Each House supports 5
units. The Town Center also supports 5 units. A Castle supports up to 20 units. Before
you can expand your population by creating new villagers, military units, or ships, you
must have enough Houses to support them. The population indicator (upper-left corner
of the screen) shows your current population in relation to housing (current/supportable
population). For more information, see Chapter III.
To build a House
Click a villager, click the Buildings
button, click the Build House
button, and then click a location on
the map. If the building is flashing
red, it cannot be built there; try a
different spot.
Constructing buildings
Villagers can deposit resources at the Town Center,
the Mill, the Lumber Camp, and the Mining Camp.
Constructing these buildings near a resource
decreases the distance your villagers walk, so your
stockpile grows more quickly.
To build a Mill
Click a villager, click the Buildings button,
click the Build Mill button, and then click
a location near a forage bush. If the
building is flashing red, it cannot be built
there; try a different spot.
You assign villagers to construct other buildings
in the same way. For more information about
constructing buildings, see Chapter III.
5
Exploring
While your villagers are gathering resources, you can use your Scout Cavalry to explore
the map. Scouts are ideal for exploring because they see farther and move faster than
villagers. Keep an eye out for distant resources, forests, enemy towns, and cliffs you can
use to protect yourself. Enemy buildings are not visible until you explore the area of the
map where they are located. Beware of wolves, which may attack you and cannot be used
for food.
To explore deep into the black
area of the map
Click your Scout Cavalry, and then
right-click a location on the map or
on the mini-map in the lower-right
corner of the screen.
Your Scout Cavalry unit will go to the
location, revealing part of the map as it
moves.
As a unit leaves an area, a semitransparent fog of war falls over the explored area. The fog
of war freezes the view of the area until another unit returns to that spot. For example, if
your Scout Cavalry unit discovers an enemy building while exploring and then leaves the
area, the fog of war will show the building there (in its current state) until another one of
your units returns to that spot (even if the building is upgraded or destroyed in the
meantime). The fog of war is then lifted and the current terrain is revealed. For more
information about reconnaissance and terrain, see Chapter IV.
Creating an army
Before you can create an army, you must
construct a Barracks.
To build a Barracks
Click a villager, click the Military
Buildings button, click the Barracks
button, and then click a location on
the map.
After the Barracks is complete, you can
create infantry units there. The first
infantry unit you can create is a Militia
unit.
6 Chapter I - Getting Started
To create a Militia unit
Click the Barracks, and then click
the Create Militia button.
After a few seconds, the Militia unit
appears near your Barracks. When you
advance to the Feudal Age, you can
upgrade your Militia units and build an
Archery Range and Stable to create
different types of military units. For more
information about military tactics, see
Chapter IV.
Advancing through the ages
There are four ages: Dark Age, Feudal Age, Castle Age, and
Imperial Age. Advancing to the next age lets you build
different buildings, create more powerful military units, and
research more valuable technologies. When you have 500
food and have built two different Dark Age buildings (Mill,
Barracks, Lumber Camp, Mining Camp, or Dock, but not
including Houses or your Town Center), you can advance to
the Feudal Age.
To advance to the Feudal Age
After you have the required buildings and
food, click the Town Center, and then
click the Advance to Feudal Age button.
After several seconds, your existing buildings
change in appearance to Feudal Age buildings.
If you click a villager now, you see that
additional buildings are available in the lower-
left corner of the game screen. For more
information about advancing through the ages,
see Chapter III.
7
Upgrading units & researching technology
After you advance to the Feudal Age, you can create different military units and upgrade
your existing soldiers to stronger military units. You can also research new technologies.
To upgrade your existing Militia to
more powerful Men-at-Arms
Click the Barracks, and then click the
Upgrade to Man-at-Arms button.
After a few seconds to research the upgrade,
all of your existing Militia are replaced with
Men-at-Arms and the Create Militia button
becomes the Create Man-at-Arms button.
To research technology
Click a building that contains technologies
(for example, the Blacksmith), and then
click the button for the technology to
research (for example, Research Scale
Mail Armor).
For more information about upgrading units
and researching technology, see Chapters VII
and VIII.
Engaging in combat
Once you create an army and locate
your enemies, you can prepare for
battle. Military units engage in combat
on land. Warships engage in combat at
sea and with land units.
8 Chapter I - Getting Started
To attack the enemy
Click your military unit (or drag the pointer around multiple
units), and then right-click the enemy unit or building to attack.
You can create a Monk to heal your wounded soldiers and to convert
enemy soldiers and buildings so you can control them, as explained in
Chapter IV. Your villagers can repair damaged buildings, ships, and
siege weapons, as explained in Chapter III. For more information about
military tactics, see Chapter IV.
Winning a game
In a Random Map game, you win by destroying all enemy military units and buildings, by
controlling all relics for a period of time, or by building a Wonder of the World that
stands for the required time period. These are the standard victory conditions, and the
first player to achieve one of these feats wins the game. For more information about how
to win, see Chapter II.
9
Tips for beginners
Here are some tips for beginners playing a typical Random Map game, where you
start in the Dark Age with a few villagers and build a powerful civilization.
Concentrate on gathering food and wood first. Use it to create new villagers
and build new Houses to support them. Put the new villagers to work gathering
more food and wood. To start, gather only enough wood for Houses to support
your villagers and to build the two buildings required to advance to the Feudal
Age.
Gather food from the forage bushes near your town. Build your Mill near forage
bushes to gather food faster. Similarly, build Lumber Camps near forests and
Mining Camps near stone and gold mines.
Build a Mill and a Barracks. You need two buildings to advance to the Feudal
Age and the Barracks is required in order to build other important buildings in
later ages.
When a sheep enters your line of sight, click a villager, and then right-click the
sheep. The villager will herd it near your Mill or Town Center before killing it
for food. You can also click a sheep, and then right-click a Town Center or Mill
so the sheep will make its own way to a food drop-off point.
Create multiple villagers (at least 10 to 15 in the Dark Age).
Send your Scout Cavalry to explore the map for more resources, locate enemy
towns, and find strategic places to build towers and walls. Reveal as much of
the map as possible so you can keep an eye on what your enemy is up to.
Wait until the Feudal Age to gather gold and stone, and continue to gather
wood.
Build multiple Farms in the Feudal Age. Build the Farms as close as possible to
each other and to your Town Center or Mill. This maximizes your real estate,
lets villagers deposit food from Farms faster, and centralizes your Farms in one
location so you can quickly rebuild them when they become fallow.
Click the Idle Villager button near the mini-map in the lower-right corner of
the game screen or press the PERIOD ( . ) key to find villagers who aren’t
working.
Press the COMMA ( , ) key to find your idle military units.
Attack in numbers.
Upgrade the armor and attack strength of your military units at the Blacksmith
starting in the Feudal Age.
If you’re attacked, ring the town bell at the Town Center to garrison your
villagers safely inside.
Learn strategies by watching how the computer plays. To observe the computer
player, select All Visible in the Reveal Map list under Game Settings on the
single-player Random Map screen before you start a game. Then when you
start the game, you can see how the computer players are building up their
civilizations.
Build walls and towers to protect your town from enemy attack. Look for areas
on the map that are easy to wall off (between forests or across shallows).
10 Chapter I - Getting Started
Options & hotkeys
You can change the music volume, sound effects volume, scroll speed, screen size, mouse
interface, and hotkeys to your liking. You can also change, add, or delete a player name.
Any options you change are saved under your player name and are automatically in effect
when you start the game. For a list of some default hotkeys, see the back of the manual.
To customize the game options
Before you start a game, click Options on the main menu. For help
changing the options, hold your mouse pointer over any item on the
screen to display information in the lower-right corner.
–or–
While you are in a game, click the Menu button in the upper-right
corner, and then click Options.
Saving & exiting
For information about saving and restoring multiplayer games, see Chapter II.
To save a single-player game
Click the Menu button in the upper-right corner of the screen, click Save, and then
type a name for the game or select the game to save.
Games are saved in the Savegame folder where Age of Empires II is installed.
To exit a game
Click the Menu button in the upper-right corner of the screen, and
then click Quit Current Game.
11
Chapter II
S etting Up a Game
Game types
After you’re comfortable with the basics of Age of
Empires II, you can play any of the following types of
games. Many players start with the campaigns and then
play single-player or multiplayer Random Map games. In
a single-player game, you compete against players
controlled by the computer. In a multiplayer game, you
compete against other human players across a local area
network or the Internet.
Campaign game
Join Joan of Arc, Genghis Khan, Saladin, or Frederick Barbarossa in a
series of historically based scenarios. You must win each game before
you can progress to the next one in the campaign.
To play a campaign
Click Single Player on the main menu, click Campaigns,
and then click the name of the campaign you want to play
If you are learning to play Age of Empires II, you may want to start with the
William Wallace learning campaign. Just click Learn to Play on the main
menu.
Random Map game
In a Random Map game, you play a different game every time because the map
is never the same. You can use the standard game settings or choose your own,
including the number of players and their civilizations, map type and size,
population limit, quantity of starting resources, starting age, and victory
condition.
12 Chapter II - Setting Up a Game
To play a single-player Random Map game
Click Single Player on the main menu, click Random Map, and then choose the
game settings. For help choosing these settings, hold your mouse pointer over any
item on the screen to display information in the lower-right corner.
To play a multiplayer Random Map game, see “Multiplayer games” later in this chapter.
Regicide game
In a Regicide game, your King must be the last to survive. If your King is killed, you’re
eliminated from the game. All players start the game with a King, a Town Center, a
Castle, and several villagers. Your King has low hit points and no attack, so keep him
highly protected. You cannot create a new King, and a King is available only in a Regicide
game.
In a Regicide game, the Spies technology (at the Castle) is called Treason and works in a
unique way (for normal Spies benefits, see Chapter VIII). Each time you research Treason
in a Regicide game, a signal indicates where the enemy Kings are and you hear a notifica-
tion sound. The location is revealed temporarily, so to keep track of a King’s location you
may need to research Treason multiple times. In a Regicide game, the technology cost is
incurred each time you research Treason.
To play a single-player Regicide game
Click Single Player on the main menu, click Regicide, and then
choose the game settings. For help choosing these settings, hold your
mouse pointer over any item on the screen to display information in
the lower-right corner.
To play a multiplayer Regicide game, see “Multiplayer games” later in this chapter.
Death Match game
In a Death Match, all players start the game with huge stockpiles of wood, food, gold, and
stone — and then fight to the death.
To play a single-player Death Match game
Click Single Player on the main menu, click Death Match, and then choose the
game settings. For help choosing these settings, hold your mouse pointer over any
item on the screen to display information in the lower-right corner.
To play a multiplayer Death Match, see “Multiplayer games” later in this chapter.
Custom scenarios & campaigns
A custom scenario or campaign is a game or series of related games that you or your
friends have created. For information about custom scenarios, see “Creating custom
scenarios & campaigns” later in this chapter.
To play a custom scenario
or campaign
Click Single Player on the main menu, and then click
Custom Scenario or Custom Campaign.
13
Recording & replaying games
You can record single-player and multiplayer games and watch them later.
To record and replay games
1 Before starting a game, select Record Game on the pregame settings screen.
2 Play a game as you normally would. The game is automatically saved with a generic
name and contains the date and time the game was played.
3 To watch a recorded game, click Saved Game on the main menu. Select the game
you want to watch from the Select Saved Game list.
You can use the controls in the lower-left corner to determine the player’s point of view
and to replay the game in a demo loop. You can also rewind, pause, and fast forward.
Tip: If you want to capture a screenshot of your
victory, press the PRINT SCREEN key. Bitmaps
are saved as a series in the directory where the
game was installed (for example, AoE0001.bmp,
AoE0002.bmp).
Choosing a civilization
When playing a Random Map, Regicide, or Death Match game, you can select which of
13 great medieval civilizations you want to battle or guide to glory. Each civilization has
particular abilities, a unique military unit that can be created starting in the Castle Age, a
special bonus that applies during team games, and access to certain units and technolo-
gies.
You can choose your civilization and your computer opponents’ civilizations. When
choosing a civilization, consider the map type, victory conditions, and strengths and
weaknesses of your opponents. For information about each civilization’s capabilities, see
the foldout provided with the game and the technology trees in the Appendix or in the
game. You can also choose a random civilization, to let the computer choose civilizations
for you and all other players.
More than one player can choose the same civilization. In a multiplayer cooperative
game, two or more players can choose the same player number and share control of a
single civilization.
Team bonuses apply to all team members and are calculated after the game starts. If a
team member changes teams or is eliminated from the game, the team bonuses at the start
of the game remain in effect.
14 Chapter II - Setting Up a Game
Choosing a map
Before you start a Random Map, Regicide, or Death
Match game, you can select the type of map to use.
Some civilizations have combat advantages on
certain map types. For example, the Vikings excel
at naval warfare and have an advantage on
maps with expanses of water.
If the map type is set to Random, the map
type is chosen for you (excluding Crater
Lake, Gold Rush, Black Forest, or Fortress).
Arabia — Arid desert with strategic
elevations and cliffs, but sparse vegetation
and water.
Archipelago — A group of large islands. You
might not be the only inhabitant on yours.
Baltic — An ocean with peninsulas and sheltered
bays.
Black Forest — Islands of grass in a sea of trees.
Follow the paths through the forest to find your
allies and enemies.
Coastal — Where the land meets the ocean, with plenty of water and a large
landmass for battles by land or by sea.
Continental — A large body of land surrounded by the sea; rivers may separate
players and teams.
Crater Lake — (Multiplayer only.) An island brimming with gold in the center of a
caldera lake. Steep elevation and lack of trees make it hard to build there.
Fortress — A walled city with gates and all the buildings you need to build up your
forces quickly.
Gold Rush — A whole heap of gold and a few wolves in the middle of a desert.
Highland — Far from the ocean and heavily forested but with plenty of rivers and
open space for maneuvers.
Islands — Each player starts alone on an island; uninhabited islands may be rich
with resources, so be prepared to rule the sea.
Mediterranean — An inland sea surrounded by land; sounds deceptively peaceful.
Migration — (Multiplayer only.) A tiny island that can’t support you for long before
you must move to the mainland, where the fighting is fierce.
Rivers — Swampy lowlands full of shallows; rivers separate players.
Team Islands — One island shared by you and your allies, and another inhabited by
your enemies. The islands are not connected by shallows, so beware of enemy
Transport Ships.
15
How to win
How you win a game depends on its victory conditions. If you’re playing a Random Map
or Death Match game, you can choose the victory condition before the game starts. If
you’re playing any other type of game, you win by achieving the objective(s) displayed at
the beginning of the game, which may also include victory condition(s) required to win
the game. You can display the objectives again during a game by clicking the Objectives
button at the top of the screen.
Standard victory
You can win any Random Map or Death Match game by being the first player or team to
defeat your enemies in military conquest, control all relics, or build a Wonder. You and
your opponents do not have to pursue the same victory condition. For example, you may
try to win by conquest while your opponent tries to win by building a Wonder.
Conquest victory
The first player (or team) to defeat all opponents wins. To defeat a player, you must
destroy all units and buildings but the following: towers, walls, gates, relics, Fishing
Ships, Fish Traps, Transport Ships, Trade Cogs, Trade Carts, Farms, and sheep.
Wonder victory
The first player to build a Wonder that stands for the required time period wins.
Before you can build a Wonder, you must advance to the Imperial Age and gather
many resources. When a civilization begins to build a Wonder, the other civilizations
are notified and shown its location on the mini-map in the lower-right corner of the
screen. When the Wonder is completed, all civilizations are notified and a count-
down clock appears in the upper-right corner of the screen. The color of the clock
indicates which civilization owns the Wonder. If a Wonder is destroyed before the
required time period, the countdown is terminated. The map size determines how
long a Wonder must stand to win the game.
Relics victory
The first player or team to control all relics for the required time period wins. Relics
are special objects (similar to trophies) that are placed randomly on the map. There
are multiple relics on a map. They can only be moved if carried by a Monk (see
Chapter IV), and they must be garrisoned inside a Monastery in order to be con-
trolled by your civilization. Relics cannot be destroyed. For example, if a Transport
Ship sinks with a Monk carrying a relic on board, the relic appears on a nearby shore.
When a civilization owns all relics, all civilizations are notified and a countdown
clock appears in the upper-right corner of the screen. The color of the clock
indicates which civilization controls the relics. The first player to control all relics
for the required time period (until the clock reaches 0) wins the game. If any relic
changes ownership before the required time period has passed, the countdown is
terminated. The map size determines how long you must control the relics to win the
game.
16 Chapter II - Setting Up a Game
Other victory conditions
If you do not want to play the standard victory conditions (Conquest, Wonder, or Relics
victory), you can choose one of these alternative victory conditions before you start a game.
Timed victory
The player or team with the highest score when the timer expires wins. You can also win
by military conquest regardless of the time remaining. When you select this victory
condition, you choose the time limit. A countdown clock is displayed in the upper-right
corner of the screen. When the clock reaches 0, the game ends and the player (or team)
with the highest score wins. A team score is the average of all team members’ scores.
To display the score
Click the Advanced Commands button near the mini-map in the
lower-right corner of the screen, and then click the Statistics
button above it and to the left.
The Statistics button displays different information depending on the mini-map mode
you have selected. If you have the Normal mini-map mode selected, the score for each
player appears. If you have the Combat or Economic mode selected, different information
appears. To learn more about the different mini-map modes, hold your mouse pointer over
the mini-map buttons to display information in the lower-left corner.
17
Score victory
The first player or team to achieve the required score wins. Players earn points for
various achievements, as explained below in the score calculation. You can also win by
military conquest regardless of the score. When you select this victory condition, you
choose the score. A team score is the average of all team members’ scores.
The score is calculated as follows. The Achievements screen following the game provides
details on your accomplishments.
Resources in stockpile = 1/10 point per unit — For example, each time a villager
deposits 10 food in your stockpile, you receive 1 point. Receiving a tribute of 500
gold is worth 50 points, and so on. The player sending the tribute loses the point
value of those resources.
Constructing buildings, creating units, and researching technologies doubles the
point value of resources — For example, gathering 30 wood provides 3 points but
building a House (which costs 30 wood) provides 6 points. Thus, researching a
technology that costs 50 food and 10 gold provides 12 points. The resources used to
build or research are subtracted from your score, so the 12 points in this example
actually only result in a net 6-point score increase.
The value of any units that are killed or converted is added to the score of the player
who kills them and subtracted from the score of the player who owns them — For
example, if creating a unit costs 50 food (5 points), it is worth 10 points after being
created. If you kill or convert the unit, 10 points are added to your score and 10
points are deducted from your opponent’s score.
Each 1% of the map explored = 10 points.
Multiplayer games
In a multiplayer game, you play with or
against human players connected
across a network, the Internet, a
modem, or a serial connection. Up
to eight players can connect to a
game across a network or the
Internet. Two players can connect
to a game across a modem or serial
connection.
18 Chapter II - Setting Up a Game
Creating or joining a multiplayer game
You can create a game that other players can join. The player with the fastest computer
should create the game.
To create or join a multiplayer game
1 If you are connecting across a network or the Internet, establish your connection
before you start Age of Empires II.
If you are using the Zone to connect across the Internet, see “Playing Age of Empires
II on the MSN Gaming Zone” later in this chapter.
2 Click Multiplayer on the main menu.
3 Select your connection type. The connection types listed depend on the hardware,
software, and services you are using. If you are on a network and do not know which
protocol it uses, check with your network administrator. Common connection types
include:
IPX Connection for DirectPlay — Connect across a network that uses the IPX
protocol.
Internet TCP/IP Connection for DirectPlay — Connect across the Internet or
a network that uses the TCP/IP protocol.
Local (LAN) TCP/IP Connection — Connect across a network that uses the
TCP/IP protocol. If you choose this connection type, games automatically
appear in the games list; you don’t have to click Show Games.
Modem Connection for DirectPlay — Connect two computers using a 28.8-
Kbps (or faster) modem.
Serial Connection for DirectPlay — Connect two computers using a null-
modem cable.
4 To join a game, click the Show Games button, click the game to join, and then click
the Join button. Only games created with the same Age of Empires game you are
using appear in the games list. For example, if you are using Age of Empires II, the
games list does not display games created with Age of Empires or Rise of Rome
Expansion. Also, games must be the same version; if one player has a patch version,
all players must have it.
–or–
To create a game, click the Create button. Follow the instructions that appear on the
screen for the connection type you are using. Select the game settings. For help on
the settings, hold your mouse pointer over any item on the screen to display
information in the lower-right corner. To discuss the game settings with the other
players, type in the Chat box, and then press ENTER to send the message.
19
5 If you are joining a game, you can select your Civilization, Player, and Team.
–or–
If you are the game creator, you can select all of the settings:
Name — Shows the player names. If you are creating a game, close some of the
positions in the Name list to limit a game to fewer than eight players. Closing a
position occupied by a player ejects the player from the game. Selecting
Computer allows computer opponents to play in the game.
Civilization — Shows each player’s civilization. Each civilization has special
skills and can research different technologies. For more information about each
civilization’s attributes, see the foldout provided with the game or the technol-
ogy trees in the Appendix or in the game. More than one player can choose the
same civilization.
Player — Shows the starting position on the map and color of the civilization.
To change the setting, click the player number. To play a cooperative game, two
or more players must select the same player number and share control of a single
civilization. Each player can give unrestricted (and even conflicting) orders to
all units.
Team — Shows the players who want to
start the game as allies. You can select a
team by clicking the Team number. A
dash (-) in the Team box indicates no
team. Players on the same team auto-
matically have their diplomatic stance
set to Ally, and Allied Victory is
selected. If you want to prevent players
from changing teams after the game
starts, select the Lock Teams check box
(in the pregame settings). Also, if this
option is set, you can pay tribute only to
allied players. If game teams are not
locked, players can change alliances
during the game by clicking the Diplo-
macy button in the upper-right corner of the screen.
6 When you are ready to begin the game, click I’m Ready!
All players must click I’m Ready! before the host can start the game. The names of
players who are ready are shown in green. If you change your mind before the game
starts, click the check box again. The game does not begin until all players are ready
and the game creator starts it.
If you are the game creator, click the Start Game button.
20 Chapter II - Setting Up a Game
Multiplayer game speed
Multiplayer games run only as fast as the slowest computer in the game. If the game seems
jerky or responds slowly while you are playing, one or more players may have latency or
frame rate problems.
A turtle icon appears beside the name of the player with the slowest frame rate. (To see
the icon, turn on Advanced Commands by clicking the Advanced Commands button in
the lower-right corner of the screen. Then click the Statistics button to show player
names.) The player can drop out of the game or can try to improve performance as
explained in the Readme file on the Age of Empires II CD.
A yellow or red dot appears beside the name of players with a slow Internet connection.
A yellow dot indicates latency of 300 milliseconds to 1 second. A red dot indicates
latency greater than 1 second. If the game is so slow that it’s difficult to play, you may
want to save and then restore the game (see “Restoring a saved multiplayer game” later in
this chapter).
If you lose your connection during a multiplayer game, you cannot rejoin the game, but
you can restore a saved game.
Saving a multiplayer game
To save a multiplayer game
Click the Menu button in the upper-right corner of the screen,
click Save, and then type a name for the game or select the
game to save.
Games are saved in the Savegame folder where Age of Empires II is
installed.
Restoring a saved multiplayer game
Before you can restore a saved multiplayer game, at least two opposing players must be
connected (this prevents cheating). To restore a multiplayer game with computer players,
the original game host must host the restored game.
To restore a multiplayer game
1 If you are connecting across the Internet, establish your network connection before
you start Age of Empires II.
2 On the main menu, click Multiplayer.
3 Select your connection type, as explained in “Creating or joining a multiplayer
game” earlier.
4 If you are hosting the game, click the Restore button, and then choose the saved
game to restore.
–or–
If you are joining the game, select the game from the games list.
5 Follow the instructions that appear on the screen for the connection type you
are using.
21
Resigning from a multiplayer game
When you resign from a multiplayer game, all units on the map become visible so you can
observe the game, but you can no longer issue commands or chat with other players.
To resign from a multiplayer game
Click the Menu button in the upper-right corner of the screen, and
then click Resign.
Playing Age of Empires II on the MSN™ Gaming Zone
1 To download the Zone software to your computer, double-click My
Computer on your desktop, right-click the drive that contains the Age
of Empires II CD, and then select Install Zone Software. Follow the
directions that appear on the screen.
2 Connect to your Internet service provider, and then start either
Microsoft Internet Explorer (version 3.02 or later) or Netscape Naviga-
tor (version 4.0 or later).
3 To go to the Zone Web site, click the Zone button on the Age of
Empires II main menu, or go to http://www.zone.com.
4 On the Zone home page, go to the Game Index and click
Age of Empires II to start playing with other players on the Zone.
Creating custom scenarios & campaigns
Important: Age of Empires II allows you to create your own custom campaigns, scenarios,
and computer player scripts. You may share these custom campaigns, scenarios, and
computer player scripts for the purposes of gameplay but you may not sell or make other
commercial uses of the custom campaigns, scenarios, and computer player scripts.
Microsoft reserves all other rights to the editors and files.
Creating or editing scenarios
You can create your own scenarios and campaigns. When you create a scenario, you
control all aspects of the game, from placing buildings, military units, and grass on the
map to choosing the victory condition or conditions and writing the hints for how to win.
22 Chapter II - Setting Up a Game
To create or edit a scenario
1 Click Map Editor on the main menu, and then click Create Scenario or Edit
Scenario.
2 Click the buttons (Map, Terrain, Players, and so on) at the top of the Map Editor to
display the settings you can customize, and then select your scenario settings.
For help using the Map Editor, hold your mouse pointer over any item on the screen
to display information at the bottom of the map.
3 To save your scenario, click Menu, and then click Save or Save As.
4 To playtest your scenario without leaving the Map Editor, click Menu, and then
click Test.
5 To return to the Map Editor after testing your scenario, click Menu, and then click
Quit Current Game.
Creating your own campaigns
If you have created your own scenarios, you may want to put them into a campaign to
share with your friends. A campaign is a group of scenarios that are played in a particular
order. When you create a campaign, you control which scenarios a campaign contains and
the order your friends play them. In your own campaigns, you will not be able to include
the multimedia components (art, music, and text) that Age of Empires II includes
between scenarios and campaigns.
To create your own campaign
1 Click Map Editor on the main menu, and then click Campaign Editor.
2 Type a new name in the Campaign Filename box, or select one from the list.
3 Select a scenario in the Campaign Scenarios box, and then click Add to include it
in the campaign.
The Campaign Scenarios box lists the scenarios (in the order they will be played) in
the campaign.
4 To change the scenario order, click a scenario in the Campaign Scenarios box, and
then click the Up or Down button.
To remove a scenario from the campaign, select it in the Campaign Scenarios box,
and then click Remove.
5 To save the campaign, click Save.
Creating computer player scripts
You can create your own computer player scripts that tell the computer what to build,
how to behave, and so on. To learn more about how to do this, see the Computer Player
Strategy Builder Guide (CPSB.doc) in the Docs folder on the Age of Empires II CD.
23
Chapter III
B uilding Your Empire
Putting your villagers to work
Villagers are invaluable to your civilization. Their primary function
is to gather wood, food, gold, and stone from the land and deposit it
in your stockpile. They also construct buildings and repair damaged
buildings, boats, and siege weapons. In a pinch, they can even
engage in combat. Fishing Ships also contribute to population count
because their sole purpose is to fish for food.
The more villagers you have, the faster you can build up your
civilization. Researching the Wheelbarrow (at the Town Center)
makes villagers work faster.
When you put a villager to work, its name in the status area at the
bottom of the screen indicates its current task:
Farmer — Gathers food from Farms and deposits it at the
Town Center or Mill. Researching technologies at the Mill
increases Farm production. Click a villager, and then right-
click an expired Farm to order the villager to automatically
rebuild it.
Fisherman — Gathers food from fish near the shore and
deposits it at the Town Center or Mill. Fishing Ships also fish
for food and deposit it at the Dock.
Forager — Gathers food from forage bushes and deposits it at
the Town Center or Mill, whichever is closer.
Hunter — Kills deer and wild boar (use more than one villager
because boar can be dangerous) for food and deposits it at the
Town Center or Mill. Military units can also kill animals, but
no food can be gathered from the carcass.
24 Chapter III - Building Your Empire
Lumberjack — Chops trees for wood. Wood is deposited at the Town Center or
Lumber Camp, whichever is closer.
Builder — Constructs buildings. The more villagers assigned to a building, the faster
it is built.
Repairer — Repairs buildings, ships, and siege weapons damaged in combat. To
repair a building, ship, or siege weapon, click a villager, and then right-click the unit
to repair.
Shepherd — Gathers food from sheep and deposits it at the Town Center or Mill.
Sheep start the game neutral (gray) and unowned. As soon as a sheep enters the line
of sight of a unit, the sheep is under control of that player. You can steal ownership
of another player’s sheep if it comes within your unit’s line of sight and there are no
other players’ units near the sheep. Once you own the sheep, you can move it near
your food drop-off location to collect food from it. If you assign a villager to gather
food from a sheep, the villager will herd the sheep to the nearest food drop-off point
and then kill it to collect food.
Gold Miner — Gathers gold from gold mines
and deposits it at the Town Center or
Mining Camp, whichever is closer.
Stone Miner — Gathers stone
from stone mines and deposits
it at the Town Center or
Mining Camp, whichever
is closer.
Stockpiling resources
Resources (wood, food, gold, and stone are
the building blocks of your civilization. Villagers gather
these resources from the land and deposit them in your stockpile (shown in the upper-left
corner of the screen). You use the resources in your stockpile to pay for new villagers,
soldiers, buildings, and technologies as you build your empire.
Food is an important resource used primarily to create villagers, create soldiers,
research some technologies, and advance to the next age.
Wood is used primarily to construct buildings, ships, and some siege weapons. It is
also used to create archers and to research some technologies.
Stone is used primarily to build and upgrade walls and towers, Castles, and Wonders.
Gold is used primarily to create advanced military units and to research technologies
in the later ages. You can also increase your stockpile of gold by trading with other
players (see Chapter V) or garrisoning relics inside a Monastery (see Chapter IV).
You can also increase your stockpile of wood, food, gold, or stone by selling resources at
the Market. In addition, other players can pay tribute to you in gold (see Chapter V).
25
To gather wood, food, gold, or stone
Click a villager, and then right-click a tree, forage bush (or other
food source), gold mine, stone mine, or other work site.
If you select a forage bush, for example, the villager gathers as much food as he or she can
carry, takes it to the Town Center and deposits it in your stockpile, and then returns to
the forage bush to gather more.
The more villagers at work gathering resources, the faster your stockpile grows. Villagers
can deposit the resources more quickly if you build Mills near sources of food, Lumber
Camps near forests, and Mining Camps near stone and gold mines.
Researching the following technologies improves your villagers’ gathering abilities:
Wheelbarrow, Hand Cart (Town Center); Heavy Plow (Mill); Double-Bit Axe, Bow Saw,
Two-Man Saw (Lumber Camp); Stone Mining, Gold Mining, Stone Shaft Mining, Gold
Shaft Mining (Mining Camp).
Resources are gradually depleted and eventually disappear. When this happens, the
villager goes to the same type of site if one is nearby or stands idle until you give new
orders.
To find idle villagers
Click the Idle Villager button near the mini-map. Each time you click
the button, your screen centers on the next idle villager, Fishing Ship,
Trade Cart, Trade Cog, Transport Ship, or building with garrisoned
units.
To display the resources at a work site
Click a forage bush, tree, stone mine, gold mine, or other work site.
The amount of resources it contains is shown in the status area at the
bottom of the screen.
Farms & Fish Traps
Farms and Fish Traps are the only renewable sources of food. A villager builds a Farm (or
a Fishing Ship builds a Fish Trap) and then gathers food from it and deposits it at the
Town Center or Mill (or Dock). Only one farmer can work a Farm, and only one Fishing
Ship can work a Fish Trap.
To gather food from a Farm or Fish Trap
After building a Mill, click a villager, click the Buildings
button, and then click the Build Farm button.
–or–
After advancing to the Feudal Age, click a Fishing Ship,
and then click the Build Fish Trap button.
26 Chapter III - Building Your Empire
When all of the food has been collected from a Farm or Fish Trap, it expires and the
villager or Fishing Ship that was working there stands idle on it. Gradually, the Farm or
Fish Trap begins to disappear.
To rebuild a Farm or Fish Trap
Click a villager or Fishing Ship, and then right-click an expired
Farm or Fish Trap.
Rebuilding a Farm or Fish Trap costs the same as building a new one but is more efficient
because you don’t need to use the Build Farm or Build Fish Trap button. When a Farm or
Fish Trap expires, you hear a notification sound. To go to the location, click the Idle
Villager button. A Farm or Fish Trap remains expired for a brief period then disappears
and must be rebuilt using the Build buttons.
Constructing buildings
Constructing buildings costs wood or stone. You can build more than one of each
building. For example, you might build two Lumber Camps or three Mining Camps. As
you advance through the ages, the appearance of each building evolves and new military
units, upgrades, technologies, and buildings become available. Allied civilizations cannot
help each other construct buildings (except by paying tribute in needed wood or stone to
one another).
Researching Masonry and Architecture (at the University) increases the hit points of
your buildings and walls. Researching Treadmill Crane (at the University) decreases
construction time. You can upgrade your Castle hit points by researching Hoardings (at
the Castle). You can upgrade your Town Center, Castle, and tower range and attack by
researching Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, and Bracer (at the Blacksmith).
For descriptions of the buildings you can construct, see Chapter VI.
To construct a building
1 Click a villager (or select a group). The more villagers assigned to a building, the
faster it is built.
2 Click the Buildings button or Military Buildings button.
3 Click the button of the building to build. For example, to build a House, click the
Build House button. To display additional buildings your villagers can construct,
click the More Buildings button.
4 Click a location on the map. The building is shown in flashing red if you cannot
build in a particular location.
To build more than one of the same building, hold down the SHIFT key, and then
click multiple locations on the map. To build multiple walls, click a location, and
then drag the pointer where you want to build walls.
To build a Gate
Advance to the Feudal Age, click a villager, click the Military Buildings
button, click the Build Gate button, and then click a location on or next
to an existing wall where you want to build the Gate.
27
Repairing buildings, ships & siege weapons
Buildings, ships, and siege weapons catch fire when they have been damaged in combat.
Your villagers can repair them to their full hit points. Repairs cost a percentage of the
original cost to build the ship, building, or siege weapon and are completed in a fraction
of the time. Like building, repairs take less time if you use several villagers. You can also
repair allies’ buildings, ships, and siege weapons. The cost of repairs is deducted from the
owner’s stockpile. Garrisoned villagers cannot repair from inside a building.
Buildings show damage when they are attacked and their hit points are reduced. They
flame when moderately damaged, automatically eject all garrisoned units when heavily
damaged, and collapse when destroyed. The status area at the bottom of the screen shows
how much damage a building or unit has taken. The more green in the hit point bar, the
healthier your building or unit.
To repair a building, ship, or siege weapon
Click a villager (or select a group), and then right-click
the building, ship, or siege weapon to repair.
Increasing your population
Before you can create new villagers, military units, and ships, you must have enough
housing to support the new population. One House supports five units. The Town Center
also supports five units. The Castle supports 20 units. If a House, Town Center, or Castle
supporting units is destroyed, you do not lose the units it supported, but you must build
new housing before you can create any new units.
The population limit set at the beginning of the game determines how many villagers,
military units, or ships your civilization can support. The default population limit for most
games is 75. You can increase or decrease the population limit before you start a game by
changing it in the Population box in the pregame settings. For descriptions of the
villagers, military units, and ships you can build, see Chapter VII.
28 Chapter III - Building Your Empire
Creating villagers
Villagers are created at the Town Center.
To create a villager
Click the Town Center, and then click Create Villager.
After a few seconds, the villager appears near the Town
Center.
Creating military units
Before you can create military units, you must build the appropriate military building.
The Barracks is used to create infantry and is required before you can build other military
buildings. The Archery Range is used to create archers, the Stable to create cavalry, and
the Siege Workshop to build siege weapons. The Castle is used to create Trebuchets and
the unit unique to your civilization, and the Monastery is used to create Monks.
To create a military unit
Click the Barracks, Archery Range, Stable, Siege
Workshop, Castle, or Monastery, and then click the
military unit to create. For example, to create a Militia
unit, click the Barracks, and then click the Create
Militia button.
After a few seconds, the military unit appears near the building or goes to the gather
point you have set for it (see “Choosing where new units gather” later in this chapter).
Building ships
Before you can build ships, you must build a
Dock (for information about constructing
buildings, see “Constructing buildings”
earlier in this chapter). Docks must be
built on the water near a shoreline.
To build a ship
Click the Dock, and then click
the ship to build. For example, to
build a Fishing Ship, click the Build
Fishing Ship button.
After a few seconds, the ship appears near the Dock.
29
Creating multiple units
You can easily create multiple units.
To create multiple units
Click any unit button to add one of that unit to the production
queue (shown in the status area at the bottom of the screen).
Click a unit in the queue to remove it from the queue.
You can also press and hold the SHIFT key while clicking the
unit’s Create button to queue multiple units at once.
You can train different units at the same building at the same time (for example, archers
and skirmishers at the Archery Range). You can queue up to 15 units. Units are created in
the order they are queued. The resources are deducted from your stockpile at the time a
unit is added to the queue. If you remove a unit from the queue, the resources are
returned to your stockpile.
Choosing where new units gather
All buildings used to create units allow you to choose where the newly created units
gather. For example, if you are creating villagers at the Town Center, you might set a
gather point at a forage bush so the villagers automatically forage for food as soon as they
are created. Or you can set a gather point on a military building to garrison newly created
units inside that building. This feature is useful for generating a defensive army when your
town is under attack, so the new units don’t perish as you create them. Units garrisoned at
the following buildings using gather points cannot reenter that building once you
ungarrison them: Dock, Barracks, Archery Range, Stable, Siege Workshop, and Monas-
tery.
To set a gather point
Click a building where you can create units, and then right-
click where you want to set the gather point (a work site,
building, or other location on the map). To move a gather
point, simply set a new one.
To display the gather point for a building
Click a building where you set a gather point. A flag
appears on the game map and a white X appears on the
mini-map.
Deleting your units and buildings
You can delete your own units if you reach the population limit and your buildings if you
need space to build other buildings. If you delete a completed building or unit, no
resources are returned to your stockpile.
To delete a villager, military unit, building, or ship
Click a unit or building that belongs to you, and then press the DELETE key.
If you delete a building while it is under construction, the resources from the unbuilt
portion of the building are returned to your stockpile.
30 Chapter III - Building Your Empire
Advancing to the next age
Most games begin in the Dark Age and you strive to advance through the
Feudal, Castle, and Imperial Ages to improve the strength of your civilization.
Advancing to the next age lets you build different types of buildings, create
more powerful military units, and research more advanced technologies. Each
civilization has a unique unit that can only be created starting in the Castle
Age. Before you can advance to the next age, you must have enough resources
to pay for the advancement and two different buildings from the current age.
The buildings must be those used to create units or research technology (not
Houses, Farms, towers, walls, or Gates). For example, to advance from the Dark
Age to the Feudal Age, you might have a Mill and Barracks. To advance to the
Imperial Age, you need two different buildings or one Castle.
Dark Age
Following the final collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the fifth
century, Western Europe plunged into an extended period of
barbarity, lawlessness, and economic retreat that has come to be
known as the Dark Age. The infrastructure of the Romans, including
public works, courts, law enforcement, education, written records,
coinage, and trade, largely disappeared. Germanic invaders from north
of the Rhine and Danube Rivers substituted a tribal political structure
based on loyalty to local strong warriors. A gradual recovery was fostered by
three main influences: exceptional leaders who stabilized large areas, the Christian Church
(operating from Rome and Ireland), which preserved and spread a modicum of learning, and
revitalized economies based on agriculture (especially the wool and cloth trade).
Feudal Age
The Frankish Empire assembled by Charlemagne in the ninth century can
be considered the end of the Dark Age in Europe and the beginning of the
Feudal Age. Barbarian tribal groups that overran much of Western Europe
were giving way to better-organized regional powers. The church in Rome
was providing a unifying social fabric. Charlemagne attempted to revive
learning and encouraged a new interest in the arts. His empire fractured after
his death, however, and new waves of barbarians undid much of his work.
Political and economic power shifted away from kings to local lords who ruled
within a shifting hierarchy of vassalage. The common people worked the land to
support the hierarchy of nobles and churchmen above them.
31
Castle Age
Castles began appearing across the landscape of Europe in the ninth
century as local lords sought to solidify their power. Castles protected them
from neighbors and provided a safe haven from which mounted warriors
could ride out and control the nearby country. Typical of the Castle Age
was the conquest of Wales by Edward I of England. By placing a series of
massive castles at strategic points throughout Wales, Edward accomplished
his conquest with a minimum of fighting. The castles were impregnable to the
scattered warriors of Wales. English soldiers inside could ride out at their leisure
and control the conduct of trade, gathering of crops, and collection of taxes. The Castle Age
witnessed a rise in population, economic growth, increased trade, the Crusades to the Holy Land,
a new interest in the arts, the rise of knights, and the formation of great kingdoms.
Imperial Age
The rise of great kings and their quest for empire brought about the
final segment of the Middle Ages that can be called the Imperial Age.
The feudal system was being replaced by kings at the head of nations
in England, France, Spain, and Scandinavia. Trade was booming and
cities were growing in size and power. The Renaissance was
underway in Italy and spreading across Europe. Technolog y and
learning surpassed that of the ancient world. Firearms and other
innovations brought an end to the military dominance of knights and
castles. This end of the Middle Ages can be marked by several important events,
including the Turkish capture of Constantinople, the discovery of the New World, trading
contact by sea with Asia, and Martin Luther’s Reformation.
To advance to the next age
Click the Town Center, and then click the Advance to Feudal
Age, Advance to Castle Age, or Advance to Imperial Age
button.
32 Chapter III - Building Your Empire
Upgrading your units
As you advance through the ages, you can pay to upgrade your existing military units,
ships, walls, and towers to ones with better attack strength, defense, and speed. When you
upgrade, all of your existing structures, units, or ships of a certain type are replaced with
the more powerful upgrade. Any new structures you build or units you create will be the
upgraded version. For example, if you create 10 Militia in the Dark Age, once you
advance to the Feudal Age you can upgrade your 10 existing Militia to Men-at-Arms,
which are stronger. Units that a Monk has converted cannot be upgraded; they retain the
attributes they had at the time they were converted.
To upgrade military units, ships, towers, and walls
1 To upgrade military units, click the building where they
are created (Barracks, Archery Range, Stable, Monas-
tery, Siege Workshop, or Castle).
–or–
To upgrade ships, click the Dock.
–or–
To upgrade walls and towers, click the University.
2 Click the button of the unit you want to upgrade.
For example, to upgrade your Militia to Men-at-Arms, click
the Barracks, and then click the Upgrade to Man-at-Arms button. All of your
existing Militia become Men-at-Arms and the Create Militia button is replaced with
the Create Man-at-Arms button.
For more information about units and the technologies that can improve them, see
Chapter VII.
Researching technology
As you advance through the ages, you can research technologies to improve your
civilization. For example, researching the Loom (at the Town Center) makes your
villagers harder to kill. After you advance to the next age, you can research additional
technologies to make your villagers work more efficiently and improve your military units.
Researching technology takes time and costs resources, but after you have researched a
technology your civilization immediately begins reaping its benefits.
Some technologies are related and build on each other from one age to the next. For
example, in the Feudal Age, you can research Scale Barding Armor to give your cavalry
units more protection from attack. In the Castle Age, you can research Chain Barding
Armor, which provides your cavalry units with even more protection, and in the Imperial
Age, you can make the ultimate improvement by researching Plate Barding Armor (all
are researched at the Blacksmith).
For information about all of the technologies in the game, see Chapter VIII and the
“Technology Costs & Benefits” table in the Appendix. For information about which
technologies your civilization can research, see the foldout provided with the game or the
technology trees in the Appendix or in the game.
33
Chapter IV
M ilitary Tactics
Reconnaissance
You can engage in combat on land and at sea. You can win most games by
defeating your enemies in military conquest, which you achieve if you are the
first player to eliminate the offensive (attack) capability of your opponents. You
must destroy all units and buildings but the following: towers, walls, gates, relics,
Fishing Ships, Fish Traps, Transport Ships, Trade Cogs, Trade Carts, Farms, and
sheep.
Your military units, warships, and towers automatically attack enemy units
within their line of sight unless you order them to attack a different unit or they
are set to No Attack.
Enemy buildings and walls are not visible until you explore the area of the map
where they are located. Once an area has been explored, buildings and walls
remain visible. However, changes to the buildings, such as age upgrades,
damage, and destruction are not visible unless the building or wall is within the
sight of a villager, military unit, or ship from your civilization. Enemy villagers,
military units, and ships are visible only when they attack or are within the
sight of a unit from your civilization. You cannot explore beyond the edge of
the map.
Researching Cartography lets allies share exploration so they can see what the
others have explored. For more information about Cartography, see Chapter VIII.
Terrain
In addition to providing resources, terrain has tactical and strategic uses in
combat. The types of terrain include:
Water — Impassable by land units.
Shallows — Water passable by land units and ships.
Forest — Impassable. Use villagers, Siege Onagers, and Trebuchets to cut
paths through the forests.
Cliffs — Impassable by villagers and military units, who must find a
different path. Units firing from above receive an attack bonus; units
below incur an attack penalty.
34 Chapter IV - Military Tactics
Moving units
When you select two or more units and order them to move or attack, they automatically
maneuver into logical positions to create a formation. Units with high hit points and
armor are placed at the front of the formation. Ranged units are placed behind them.
Weak units, such as Monks or packed Trebuchets, are then placed behind the ranged
units. The entire formation moves at the speed of the slowest unit.
When you order a group to attack, it falls into a line formation. The units then break
formation to attack. For example, if you order a group of archers and swordsmen to attack
a target, the archers initiate the attack from a distance while the swordsmen close on the
target.
To move a villager, military unit, or ship
Click a villager, military unit, or ship (or select
a group), and then right-click a location.
How quickly villagers, military units, and ships move depends on the speed of the unit,
the game speed (within the game, click the Menu button, and then click Options), and
other units in the formation (if any) as described above.
Grouping units
Grouping lets you command several villagers,
military units, or ships at the same time.
To select multiple units
Drag the pointer around the villagers,
military units, or ships you want to
group.
–or–
Hold down the CTRL key, and then click
individual units.
To select all units of the same type that are visible
on the screen
Double-click a unit. For example, to select all Skirmishers,
double-click a Skirmisher.
To create a group
1 Drag the pointer around the units you want to group.
2 Hold down the CTRL key and press the number you want to assign to the group. For
example, to assign the number 2 to a group, press CTRL+2. The number appears on
each unit in the group.
Once a group has been assigned a number, you can just press that number to select it.
For example, to select group 2, press the 2 key.
35
To add units to a group
Select the unit or units you want to add to the group.
Hold down the SHIFT key and press the number of the group you want
to add the unit or units to (this causes both the group and the new units
to be selected). Then hold down the CTRL key and press the number of
the group you want to add the unit or units to.
Moving units using waypoints
You can use waypoints to order your units to go to a location using a specific path. Any
mobile unit (villagers, military units, ships, and so on) can be moved with waypoints.
To move a unit with waypoints
1 Click a unit (or select a group).
2 Hold down SHIFT, and then right-click each
point along the path. A waypoint marker
appears at each point.
3 Release the SHIFT key, and then right-click the
last point in the path. The unit (or group)
moves along the path.
Transporting units across water
You can transport units across water by loading them
on a Transport Ship. You can build a Transport Ship
at the Dock. Any mobile unit (except sheep and
other ships) can be loaded aboard a Transport Ship.
Allied players can transport each other’s units. Each
Transport Ship can carry a limited number of units
per trip.
To see how many units a Transport Ship can carry
Click the Transport Ship. The status area at the bottom of the
screen shows how many units the Transport Ship can carry
(current/maximum).
To load a Transport Ship
Click a unit, and then right-click the Transport Ship to load. The
units board the Transport Ship.
To unload a Transport Ship
Click a loaded Transport Ship, click the Unload button, and then
click a location on shore or in shallows.
36 Chapter IV - Military Tactics
Attacks
Ordering an attack
To order a military unit, villager, or ship to attack
Click a military unit, villager, or ship (or select a group), and
then right-click the enemy villager, military unit, ship, or
building to attack.
Attack notification
A horn notification sounds when your military units come under attack (or you initiate
an attack). A bell notification sounds when your non-military units or buildings come
under attack (or you initiate an attack). The horn or bell sounds once for every attack by
a specific enemy within the area of the initial attack. After a brief period, the attack area
is reset, and the horn or bell sounds again if the area is still under attack. Attacks outside
the original area (or by different players) generate additional notifications.
Garrisoning units & relics inside buildings
You can garrison units inside buildings to protect and heal them as well as to launch
surprise attacks. Garrisoned units are not damaged if the building is attacked, but they are
ejected if the building suffers heavy damage or is destroyed. Garrisoned units heal
automatically. You can set a gather point inside any building while its units are being
created. For certain buildings, units cannot reenter the building once you ungarrison
them (see Chapter III).
Units can be garrisoned in the following buildings:
Town Center — Capacity: 15 foot units. Units can be garrisoned at any time. You
can garrison villagers by setting a gather point while the villagers are being created.
Towers — Capacity: 5 foot units. Units can be garrisoned at any time.
Castle — Capacity: 20 units of any type (except siege weapons). Units can be
garrisoned at any time. You can garrison unique units by setting a gather point while
the units are being created. Units garrisoned in the Castle heal more quickly than
units garrisoned in other buildings.
Barracks — Capacity: 10 Barracks units. Units can be garrisoned only if you set a
gather point there while the units are being created.
Archery Range — Capacity: 10 Archery Range units. Units can be garrisoned only
if you set a gather point there while the units are being created.
Stable — Capacity: 10 Stable units. Units can be garrisoned only if you set a gather
point there while the units are being created.
37
Siege Workshop — Capacity: 10 siege weapons. Units can be garrisoned only if you
set a gather point there while the units are being created.
Dock – Capacity: 10 ships. Ships can be garrisoned only if you set a gather point
there while the ships are being created.
Monastery — Capacity: 10 Monks. You can also garrison relics inside the Monastery.
Monks can be garrisoned only if you set a gather point there while the Monks are
being created.
A flag appears on buildings with garrisoned units. You and your allies can see the flags.
Allied players can garrison units inside each other’s buildings (and ungarrison them at
will). Units are automatically ejected if allied players change their diplomatic stance.
Ranged units and villagers can attack while garrisoned. To see the additional attack
strength of a Castle or tower with garrisoned units, click it and look in the status area at
the bottom of the screen. The number in parentheses after the attack strength is the
bonus for garrisoned units. Castles and towers have a minimum range from which they
can attack. To eliminate the minimum range, you can research Murder Holes (at the
University). Barracks, Archery Ranges, Stables, Siege Workshops, Docks, and
Monasteries never attack, even when units are garrisoned inside them.
To garrison units
Click a unit (or select a group), hold down the ALT key, and
then right-click a Castle, Town Center, or tower.
To garrison relics
Click a Monk holding a relic, and then right-click the
Monastery.
To ungarrison all units or relics
Click a building, and then click the Ungarrison button.
To ungarrison a particular unit
Click the unit in the status area at the bottom of the screen.
To eject all units except one
Hold down CTRL, and then click the unit to remain
garrisoned.
To eject all units of the same type (for example,
all villagers)
Hold down SHIFT, and then click the type of unit to
ungarrison.
To eject all units of a different type (and leave only one
type of unit in the building)
Hold down CTRL+SHIFT, and then click the type of unit to
remain garrisoned.
38 Chapter IV - Military Tactics
Ringing the town bell
Ringing the town bell (at the Town Center) causes all of your villagers to garrison inside
the nearest available building for protection. If there is not enough room for all the
villagers, the remaining villagers continue what they were doing when the bell rang.
To ring the town bell
Click the Town Center, and then click the Ring Town Bell button.
To sound the “all clear,” click the Ring Town Bell button again.
All villagers garrisoned by the original town bell are ungarrisoned and return to what they
were doing before the bell rang. If this is not possible (for example, if a villager was
constructing a building that was destroyed in combat), the villager returns to the location
and stands idle.
Converting enemy units & buildings
You can use Monks to convert enemy units and buildings to your civilization (player
color) so you can control them. For example, if you convert enemy villagers, you can
gather wood using them. If you convert an enemy Barracks, you can create infantry there.
Non-upgraded Monks can convert enemy villagers, ships, and nonsiege military units. If
you research technology at the Monastery, they can also convert most buildings, all siege
units, and enemy Monks. Units that you convert count toward your population.
To convert an enemy unit or building
Click a Monk, and then right-click the enemy unit or building to convert.
Monks can convert most enemy units from a distance; however, they must stand adjacent
to buildings, rams, and Trebuchets to convert them. There is a random chance that the
conversion will fail. After a successful conversion, Monks must rest before attempting
another conversion. Monks cannot convert Town Centers, Castles, Monasteries, Farms,
Fish Traps, walls, Gates, or Wonders or allied units or buildings.
For more information about improving your Monks’ powers, see Chapter VII.
Monks do not automatically convert units within their sight unless they are attacked. You
must order a Monk to convert a unit. The Monk then attempts to convert the unit as
soon as it is within range. When the Monk has converted a unit, he stands idle until
given another command. There is a random chance that the Monk will fail to convert a
unit. Monks must rejuvenate their strength after a successful conversion. The rejuvena-
tion percentage is shown in the status area at the bottom of the screen.
You can convert and use a building you have not constructed, but converted units and
buildings maintain their attributes (attack, range, and so on) at conversion; they cannot
be upgraded. A Monk ordered to convert an enemy unit in a formation will convert only
that unit and not the entire formation.
39
Healing friendly units
You can use Monks or garrisoning to heal your units, which restores their original hit
points.
To heal a villager or military unit
Click a Monk, and then right-click the friendly unit to heal.
Monks can heal the hit points of wounded villagers and military units from their own and
allied civilizations. Monks near wounded units automatically start healing them. Multiple
Monks heal faster than a single Monk. They do not need to rejuvenate after healing as
they do after conversions. Monks cannot heal buildings, ships, or siege units, but villagers
can repair them (see Chapter III). You can also heal units by garrisoning them inside
buildings. For more about garrisoning, see “Garrisoning units and relics inside buildings”
earlier in this chapter.
When a Monk is part of a formation, it automatically starts healing all of the injured units
in the formation when the formation is idle.
Ordering units to patrol, guard, or follow
You can order your military units to patrol an area, guard a unit or building, or follow a
friendly or enemy unit. How the units respond to the enemy while performing these
activities is determined by the combat stance you choose.
Patrol
Patrol units protect an area that you designate. Patrol units attack enemy units that enter
their sight, but they do not stray farther from the patrol route than their sight. They
return to their patrol route after engaging the enemy.
To order a unit to patrol
Turn on advanced commands by clicking the Advanced Commands
button in the lower-right corner of the screen. Then click a unit, click
the Patrol button, and then click the area to patrol. The unit will patrol
back and forth from its starting point to the patrol point you select.
To order a unit to patrol in a pattern
Click a unit, click the Patrol button, and then hold down the SHIFT
key while clicking the waypoints to patrol. Release the SHIFT key to
set the last waypoint. If you set the last waypoint on the patrolling unit,
the unit travels in a loop; if you set the last waypoint on the ground, the
unit retraces its steps, patrolling back and forth. For more information
about waypoints, see “Moving units using waypoints” earlier in this
chapter.
40 Chapter IV - Military Tactics
Guard
Guard units position themselves so the unit or building they are protecting is within their
sight. Guards attack any units that attack or enter the sight of the unit or building they
are protecting. However, they only attack if they can do so without losing sight of the
unit or building they are protecting.
To order a unit to guard
Turn on advanced commands by clicking the Advanced Commands
button in the lower-right corner of the screen. Then click a unit,
click the Guard button, and then click the unit or building to
guard.
Follow
Following units follow an allied or enemy unit by trailing it at the maximum distance
allowed by their sight. For example, you might set a Scout Cavalry unit, which has a long
line of sight, to follow a foot soldier, which has a short line of sight, so you can spot an
enemy unit sooner.
To order a unit to follow
Turn on advanced commands by clicking
the Advanced Commands button in the
lower-right corner of the screen. Then
click a unit, click the Follow button,
and then click the unit to follow.
Combat stances
You can decide how a military unit responds in combat
situations.
To use the following stances, turn on advanced commands by clicking the Advanced
Commands button in the lower-right corner of the screen.
Aggressive Stance — Most newly created units have this stance by default.
Aggressive units attack any enemy unit or building within their sight and do not
retreat until they or the enemy have been destroyed. There is no limit to how far
aggressive units pursue the enemy.
Defensive Stance — Units attack enemy units within their sight but pursue them
only a short distance. When a defensive unit can no longer engage enemy units from
within its boundaries, it returns to its original location or resumes the task it was
performing. If a defensive unit is attacked by a ranged unit from outside its sight, the
defensive unit takes damage without responding or fleeing. Defensive units also
ignore enemy attacks while moving to a player-assigned location.
41
Stand Ground Stance — Units attack enemy units that enter their range but do not
move from their location, even if attacked. If they are on patrol and sight an enemy,
they continue to patrol. If they are guarding a unit that is attacked, they engage the
attacker only if they can do so without moving from their position.
No Attack Stance — Units do not move and do not attack, even if they are
attacked.
To set the combat stance
Click a unit, and then click the Aggressive
button, Defensive button, Stand Ground button,
or No Attack button.
Formations
Ordinarily, when you select a group
of military units and command
them to move, they automatically
form into a line or column
depending on the distance they
are traveling. When you order a
group to attack, they fall into a
line formation. The units then
break formation to attack. For
example, if you order a group of
archers and swordsmen to attack
a target, the archers initiate the
attack from a distance while the
swordsmen close on the target.
If you prefer, you can choose
locked formations for your group
to use.
Creating Formations
To create a locked formation
Click the Advanced Commands button in the lower-right corner of the
screen, select two or more military units, and then select the type of
formation to create.
Once you select a locked formation, the selected units will stay in that formation until
you disband the formation or choose a different formation to use.
Units with high hit points and armor are placed at the front of the formation. Ranged
units are placed behind them. Weak units are placed behind the ranged units. The entire
formation moves at the speed of the slowest unit.
42 Chapter IV - Military Tactics
Formations and combat stances
In a locked formation, the combat stance you choose affects how the formation acts.
When a formation contains ranged and non-ranged units, the primary purpose of the
non-ranged units is to protect the ranged units.
Aggressive — When the units reach their target they all move into range and
attack.
Defensive — In a formation with ranged and non-ranged units, non-ranged units
will not attack their target unless they are very close to the enemy and will return
to protect ranged units. In a formation containing only non-ranged units, they will
all attack.
Stand Ground or No Attack — Non-ranged units will not move from their
position.
Formation types
Units can be placed into the following
locked formations:
Line — Units are placed shoulder
to shoulder; the formation is wider
than it is long. If attacked, the line
turns to face the threat. If at rest
(without current orders), units form a
line facing the direction of their travel.
This formation works well when you have a
group of swordsmen and archers. The archers fall
in line behind the swordsmen for protection.
Box — Units form a square. Weak units are protected in the middle of the box. This
formation works well for protecting Monks or siege weapons in the center of the box
with swordsmen or cavalry surrounding them.
Staggered — A spread version of a Line formation, where the units have space
between them to mitigate damage by siege units that may be caused when units are
too close together.
Flank — Units divide into two subgroups with distance between them and attempt
to surround the enemy when attacking.
43
Chapter V
D iplomacy & Trading
Choosing your allies & enemies
You can choose your diplomatic stance toward other players. Changing
your diplomatic stance does not change other players’ stances. For example,
if you set your stance toward another player to Ally, he may still have his
diplomatic stance toward you set to Enemy. He will attack; your units will
not. In general, if you change your stance to Enemy against a computer
player, the computer player will do the same thing.
Players can change their diplomatic stances during the game unless they
are locked.
To choose your diplomatic stance toward others
1 Click the Diplomacy button in the upper-right corner of the screen.
2 Select how you regard each player:
Ally — Your units defend the units and buildings of allied players
as if they were your own. You cannot attack allied units or
buildings.
Neutral — Your units ignore the units and buildings of neutral
players unless you order them to attack. If your units are attacked
by neutral units, your units defend themselves.
Enemy — Your units attack the units and buildings of enemy
players who enter their sight. Scouts and Monks do not attack on
sight.
44 Chapter V - Diplomacy & Trading
Team games
In a team game, you and other players can join forces to win
the game. If any of the allied players achieve the victory
condition or conditions, the entire team wins the game.
Playing a team game has several advantages. Allies can
garrison units inside each other’s buildings, open and close
each other’s gates, send signals, and share exploration (by
researching Cartography at the Market). Also, each civiliza-
tion has the advantage of its unique team bonus. When any
player advances to the next age, other players are notified
with an on-screen message.
Choosing your allies
You can choose your allies before you start a game or while you
are playing. If you choose your allies before starting a game, the
game automatically sets your diplomacy settings and sets the
chat interface to send messages to all allies, and allied Town
Centers are visible on the map when you start the game.
To choose your allies before you start a game
Click the Team button to select the same team number as your allies.
The game automatically sets your diplomatic stance to Ally and selects Allied Victory. If
you want to prevent players from changing teams after the game starts, select the Lock
Teams option under Game Settings. Also, if this option is selected, you can only pay
tributes of resources to allied players.
To choose your allies after you start a game
1 Click the Diplomacy button in the upper-right corner of the screen.
2 Click the Ally button for each civilization on your team. All players who want to be
allies must do this.
3 Click Allied Victory. All players who want to pursue an allied victory must do this.
Signaling allies
In a multiplayer game, you and your allies can send each other signals to show where
you’ve discovered resources or need reinforcements.
To signal allies
Click the Signal Allies button, and then click a location on the map or
on the mini-map.
Your allies see an X on the mini-map in the location you clicked and hear a
notification sound.
45
Sending tribute to other players
If you build a Market, you can instantly transfer a tribute of wood, food, gold, or stone
from your stockpile to another player. This is a good way to encourage a player to join
forces with you, help an ally who needs more resources to advance to the next age or to
build a Wonder, or try to buy off an impending attack.
There is a 30 percent fee to send tribute to other players. For example, if you send a
tribute of 100 gold, 130 gold is deducted from your stockpile (100 goes to the player and
30 is lost). You can reduce this fee by researching Coinage and Banking (at the Market).
Note: If Lock Teams is selected in the
pregame settings, you can send tribute
only to your allies.
To send tribute to other players
1 Click the Diplomacy button in the upper-right corner of the screen.
2 Click the Wood, Food, Gold, or Stone button beside the name of the player who is
to receive the tribute.
Each time you click the resource button, 100 is added to the tribute amount (shown
on the button). The amount in your stockpile (after the tribute) is shown at the top
of the column. If you click the button when you have less than 100 of any resource,
the amount in your stockpile (minus the transaction fee) is added to the tribute.
To cancel the tribute without sending it, click Clear Tributes.
3 To send the resources to the other player, click OK.
Trading
There are two ways to trade — buying and selling resources for gold and establishing trade
routes with other players.
Buying & selling resources
Commodity trade lets you buy and sell wood, food, and stone in your stockpile for gold.
You trade commodities at the Market as if it were a bank. For example, if you have a lot of
stone in your stockpile, but you need gold to advance to the Imperial Age, you can sell
some of your stone for gold. Or if you have a lot of gold, but you really need wood to
rebuild your navy, you can use the gold to buy some wood.
You buy and sell commodities in lots of 100 at the current exchange rate. The price to
buy or sell each commodity fluctuates according to which resources all players in the
game are buying and selling the most. For example, wood costs less if players are selling a
46 Chapter V - Diplomacy & Trading
lot of it and costs more if players are buying a lot of it. The exchange rate is updated
following each transaction. You can reduce your commodity transaction fee, and thus
increase Market vigor, by researching Guilds (at the Market).
To buy or sell commodities for gold
1 Build a Market.
2 Click the Market.
The buttons in the lower-left corner of the screen show the current exchange rate to
buy or sell a commodity. For example, if the Sell Wood button displays 70, you can
sell 100 wood to gain 70 gold. The price on the button reflects the current rate (in
gold) minus the transaction fee.
3 Click the button of the resource to buy or sell.
The wood, food, gold, or stone is automatically deducted from or added to your
stockpile.
Establishing trade routes
You can establish trade routes with other players to generate gold. You can trade across
land using Trade Carts and Markets or by sea using Trade Cogs and Docks. Trade Carts
can only trade at Markets and Trade Cogs can only trade at Docks. You can trade with
any player (allied, neutral, or enemy), but if you trade with your enemies your trade units
are likely to be attacked. The longer the trade route, the more gold you receive.
Trading with other players generates gold as profit from establishing and maintaining a
trade route. No resources are actually traded from your stockpile.
Trade also works with gather points: If you set a gather point from a Dock or Market on a
foreign Dock or Market, trade units will start trading automatically when produced. For
more information about gather points, see Chapter III.
If enemy units attack a trade unit, it retreats temporarily and then attempts to continue
along its route. If the foreign Market or Dock on the trade route is destroyed, the Trade
Cart or Trade Cog returns to the Market or Dock where it received its trade goods and
awaits orders. Trade units can only return gold to locations owned by their player, not
allies.
The gold a trade unit is carrying back from a foreign Market or Dock is shown in the
status area at the bottom of the screen when that trade unit is selected.
To establish a trade route
1 Build a Trade Cart at the Market, or build a Trade Cog at the Dock.
2 Click the Trade Cart or Trade Cog, and then right-click a foreign Market or Dock to
trade with.
The Trade Cart or Trade Cog travels to the foreign Market or Dock with a load of trade
goods, picks up a load of gold (profit from the trade goods), and returns to your Market or
Dock to deposit the gold in your stockpile. The trade unit continues to travel back and
forth along the trade route unless you send it to a different location or it is destroyed or
converted by the enemy.
47
Chapter VI
B uildings
The buildings you construct determine the types of soldiers you can create and
which technologies you can research to improve your civilization. For example,
you need a Barracks to create and upgrade infantry units and a Blacksmith to
improve their attack strength and armor. Economic buildings, such as the
Town Center and Mill, support your civilization and improve your economy.
For example, you use the Mill to deposit food and to research technologies that
improve your Farms’ food production.
You can improve the line of sight of all of your buildings by researching Town
Watch and Town Patrol (at the Town Center) and strength by researching
Masonry and Architecture (at the University). Towers and some other
buildings also have other technologies that improve them.
For more information about constructing buildings, see Chapter III. For
information about technologies to improve your buildings, see Chapter VIII.
Economic buildings
Economic buildings support your civilization
and improve your economy.
Town Center
The Town Center is the hub of your civilization.
It lets you do the following (for more information,
see Chapters III and IV):
Create new villagers.
Deposit all resources (wood, food, gold, and stone) into your stockpile.
Advance to the next age.
Research technology that improves your villagers and buildings.
Ring the town bell to garrison villagers safely inside during enemy
attack.
48 Chapter VI - Buildings
Each Town Center supports 5 population units and can garrison 15 villagers or soldiers
inside for protection and healing. Town Centers with garrisoned units also fire arrows at
enemy soldiers. After you advance to the Castle Age, you can build additional Town
Centers near remote resources to expand your civilization. Town Centers cannot be
converted by enemy Monks.
You can improve the damage and range of your Town Centers by researching Fletching,
Bodkin Arrow, and Bracer (at the Blacksmith); line of sight by researching Town Watch
and Town Patrol (at the Town Center); and hit points, armor, and accuracy by research-
ing Masonry, Architecture, and Ballistics (at the University).
All villages and towns had an administrative center that was the seat of governmental power and leadership.
During the Dark Ages this might have been the local leader’s home. Later it might have been the town hall or
local lord’s manor house. The town center was often the place where important supplies were stored, especially
food surpluses. The destruction of the town center usually meant the loss of the town’s governmental
infrastructure. If this could not be restored, the town or village ceased to function.
House
Houses support the population of your civilization. The more Houses you
have, the larger your population can grow. Each House supports 5
population units. Before you can create new villagers, military units,
ships, or Trade Carts, you must have enough Houses to support them.
The population indicator (top of the screen) shows your current/supportable population.
It flashes when you need to build more Houses. For more information about population,
see Chapter III.
During the Middle Ages in Europe, peasants often kept farm animals in a separate room or on the ground
floor of their houses. Merchants and craftsmen also used ground floors as a place of business with living areas
above. Lords lived in larger manor houses with kitchens separated to reduce the risk of fire. The homes of lords
in the Dark Ages were fortified before the advent of castles.
49
Mill
The Mill is used to deposit food and research technology that
improves the food production of your Farms. Build Mills near
sources of food to gather food faster. You must have a Mill before
you can build Farms or a Market.
One of the early industrial enterprises of the Middle Ages was the grinding Mill. Handed down from
antiquity, this technolog y greatly sped the otherwise backbreaking process of grinding wheat and other grains
into flour. Mills used water, wind, and animal power to turn the grinding stone. Grain was converted into
flour and the mill owner kept a percentage of the flour as compensation. Mills might be owned by a local lord,
a monastery, or a local entrepreneur. The profits of mills led to conflict and competition, and the right to grind
grain for a community had to be paid for and defended. Millers could become modestly wealthy. They became
part of the rising middle class of merchants and craftsmen that grew in importance as the Middle Ages
progressed.
Farm
Farms provide a renewable source of food. Farms are built by villagers,
who then gather food from them. Each Farm provides a limited amount
of food before it goes fallow and must be rebuilt. To rebuild a Farm,
select a villager, and then right-click the expired Farm. Only one
villager can work each Farm. Before you can build Farms, you must build a Mill. Farms
cannot be converted by enemy Monks. You can farm enemy Farms that have been
abandoned.
You can increase the production of your Farms by researching Horse Collar, Heavy Plow,
and Crop Rotation (at the Mill).
The technolog y of farming was carried forward into the Middle Ages and improved. Northern European soils
were often rich glacial deposits hidden under dense forests. Over the course of the Middle Ages, much of this
land was cleared and converted into farms. Key technolog y improvements in farming were the improved horse
harness, the heavy plow, and crop rotation. The new horse harness did not choke the animal and increased
pulling power. The heavy plow could cut into the dense soils. Farms in Europe were largely communal affairs
where each family received the produce of several rows in the field. The production of some rows went directly
to the local lord as his rent
Mining Camp
The Mining Camp is used to deposit stone and gold and research
your stone and gold mining. Build Mining Camps near stone or gold
mines to gather these resources faster.
Mining continued throughout the Middle Ages, especially for iron, salt, copper, tin,
gold, coal, and silver. The invention of gunpowder greatly increased demand for
50 Chapter VI - Buildings
sulfur and saltpeter. By 500 AD, valuable surface deposits were rare and mines had to be driven into the earth.
The desire to improve mining productivity and safety led to many important technolog y improvements. Early
tramways for pulling ore carts out of mines foreshadowed railroads of the future. The demand for more
powerful mine shaft pumps to pull out water and push in fresh air eventually led to steam engines.
Lumber Camp
The Lumber Camp is used to deposit wood and research wood-
gathering improvements. Build Lumber Camps near forests to
gather wood faster.
The great forests of Dark Age Europe were an important natural resource that was
converted into wood for building and firewood for fuel. Lumber was cut from tree
logs at a lumber camp. The early lumber camps were highly labor-intensive. A log was laid perpendicular to
the ground above a pit. With one man above ground and one in the pit, a long iron saw was used to rip boards
from the log. In the Middle Ages, better technolog y was developed to use water or animal power to drive iron
saws and increase productivity.
Dock
The Dock is used to build ships, research naval technology, and
trade with other civilizations. It is also where Fishing Ships deposit
food. Dock units can be garrisoned inside the Dock if you set a
gather point there while the units are being created. They cannot
reenter once ungarrisoned. For more information about the ships
you can build, see Chapter VII. For more information about trading,
see Chapter V.
The emergence of deep-draft merchant ships led to the construction of docks where these ships could tie up and
unload. Ships of this new design could not be dragged ashore easily for unloading. Associated with docks were
the shipyards where ships were built.
Fish Trap
Fish Traps provide a renewable source of food. Fish Traps are available
in the Feudal Age, after you build a Fishing Ship. Fish Traps are built
in the water by Fishing Ships, which then gather food from them. Only
one Fishing Ship can gather from a Fish Trap at a time. Each Fish Trap provides a limited
amount of food before it collapses and must be rebuilt. When a Fish Trap collapses, the
Fishing Ship assigned to it moves to the Fish Trap and becomes idle. To rebuild the Fish
Trap, select the Fishing Ship, and then right-click the expired Fish Trap.
Dried and salted fish were valuable commodities in the Middle Ages because they were a source of protein that
could be transported and stored. Cod caught off Iceland and Norway was an especially valuable resource.
Fishing technolog y improvements included the fish trap that allowed the netting of fish migrating up rivers
and in coastal areas.
51
Market
The Market lets you trade by land with other players, buy and sell
resources, and offer resources to other players as tribute. It is also
used to research technology that improves your communication
with allies and decreases the cost of commodity trading and
tributes. You must have a Mill before you can build a Market. For
more information about the Market, see Chapter V.
As the Dark Ages gave way to better economic conditions, the exchange of produce and craft goods increased.
Towns of all sizes set aside an area for a market where farmers and tradesmen could set up stalls for selling
their merchandise. One or more days each week were designated market days and became the social highlight
of the typical workweek. The market was also a place for the exchange of ideas, entertainment (bards,
acrobats, musicians), and the spreading of news.
Blacksmith
The Blacksmith
lets you improve
the attack strength
and armor of your
infantry, archers,
cavalry, and
towers. You must have a Blacksmith
before you can build a Siege Workshop.
Iron-working technolog y had been learned by the
barbarian tribes of Europe prior to the fall of
Rome and was carried forward into the Dark
Ages. Iron working was done at the blacksmith,
named partially for the black iron worked there
and for the black soot that covered the workers each
day. At the blacksmith iron was forged and hammered
into tools, weapons, shields, and armor. The ability to make
superior weapons and armor became a highly prized and well-
rewarded skill. Blacksmiths, armorers, and weapon makers moved into the rising middle class.
Monastery
Monasteries let you create Monks and improve their ability to heal
the wounded and convert the enemy. Monasteries cannot be
converted by enemy Monks. Relics garrisoned inside a Monastery
provide a continuous supply of gold for your stockpile, as explained
in Chapter IV. Gathering all relics is one way to win a game (see
Chapter II). Monks can be garrisoned inside the Monastery if you
set a gather point there while the Monks are being created. They cannot reenter once
ungarrisoned.
52 Chapter VI - Buildings
Monasteries were closed religious communities to which particularly devout priests, scholars, and believers
withdrew for a life of prayer, study, and service. Monastic life was embraced by several religions, including
Christianity and Buddhism. Residents of monasteries became known as monks. In parts of Dark Age Europe,
monasteries were the only remaining centers of learning. Irish monks, for example, were instrumental in
preserving much ancient knowledge and spreading it back into Europe as the Dark Ages waned. Over time
monasteries grew rich in donated land. They became very important local institutions as a source of educated
men who could serve as administrators. They also provided health care and emergency relief from their
stockpiles of food.
University
The University lets you research technology that improves your
buildings, towers, walls, and missile weapons.
During the bleakest days of the Dark Ages, learning was all but extinguished in
much of Europe. A scattering of priests and monks in isolated monasteries carried
forward the ability to read and write and kept books alive by copying old manuscripts. Charlemagne
attempted to reverse this trend by creating a school to train men who could help him control his empire, but
this experiment largely disappeared under a new wave of barbarian invasions from the north and east. The
first centers of higher learning were associated with great cathedral towns such as Cambridge, Oxford, Padua,
and Paris. Future priests and church leaders received training in Latin, the Bible, Christian philosophy, and
other Christian writings. Medicine, science, and mathematics did not enter the curricula until much later.
Graduates of these first universities led the Church and provided a pool of educated men who served
generations of European kings as advisors and administrators.
Wonder
Building a Wonder of the World demonstrates the superiority of
your civilization. A Wonder is expensive and requires a lot of time
to build. In most games, constructing a Wonder that stands for a
certain period of time wins the game.
One distinguishing cultural characteristic of the great Middle Age civilizations was architecture. Buildings in
Japan, Scandinavia, Britain, Constantinople, and Arabia looked quite different and employed different
construction techniques. In many cases, particularly noteworthy buildings stand as icons for the building
civilization, marking it for all time as a culture that achieved greatness, if only temporarily. Examples of such
Middle Age cultural icons are the Cathedral at Chartres, Charlemagne’s Palace, and the Hagia Sophia at
Constantinople.
53
Military buildings
Military buildings are used to create, upgrade, and improve your military units.
Barracks
The Barracks is used to create and improve infantry. Barracks units
can be garrisoned inside the Barracks if you set a gather point there
while the units are being created. They cannot reenter once
ungarrisoned. You must have a Barracks to build an Archery Range
or Stable.
Weapons were made and stored and soldiers drilled in the barracks. During the late Middle Ages, the barracks
was incorporated within a castle complex. It became also the part of the castle where professional soldiers lived,
ready to help defend the castle or maintain order in the surrounding countryside.
Stable
The Stable is used to
create and improve
cavalry. Stable units
can be garrisoned
inside the Stable if
you set a gather
point there while the units are being
created. They cannot reenter once
ungarrisoned. You must have a Barracks
before you can build a Stable.
As the Middle Ages continued, the rise in importance of mounted warriors
created demand for large numbers of horses, which were bred and maintained at the stable. A variety of horses
were bred, including horses for long-distance travel, fast horses for quick movement, and the heavy charger.
Scout and light cavalry units needed quick horses with lots of stamina. Heavy chargers of great strength were
required to carry fully armored knights into a charge. Mounted warriors trained at the stable as well, learning
the skills of fighting from horseback with spear, lance, sword, flail, mace, and hammer. In other parts of the
world, camels and elephants were bred and maintained for mounted combat.
Archery Range
The Archery Range is used to create archers. Archery Range units
can be garrisoned inside the Archery Range if you set a gather point
there while the units are being created. They cannot reenter once
ungarrisoned. You must have a Barracks before you can build an
Archery Range.
54 Chapter VI - Buildings
Missile weapons like the bow carried over into the Middle Ages from ancient times in most areas of the world.
Northern Europe was an exception for many centuries because the dense forests of the region nullified the
range advantage of bows. Throwing weapons like axes, javelins, and knives were more popular there. As the
forests were cleared, use of the bow spread. Training with missile weapons took place at the archery range. The
training of bowmen was especially favored in England, where every town had an archery range and
competitions were held each week to encourage practice. From its large pool of archers, England could easily
recruit several thousand expert longbowmen for armies going to France. As crossbows and early firearms
came into use, men were trained to operate these weapons at a modified archery range.
Castle
Costly and time-consuming to construct, the Castle is the strongest
defensive structure. At the Castle you can create and upgrade your
civilization’s unique unit and create the powerful Trebuchet siege
engine. Several important military technologies can also be
researched at the Castle.
A Castle supports 20 population units and can garrison 20 villagers or military units
(except siege weapons). Units can be garrisoned at any time. You can garrison unique
units by setting a gather point while the units are being created. Units garrisoned in the
Castle heal more quickly than units garrisoned in other buildings.
The first castles appeared in Europe in the ninth century as an improvement of the local lord’s stronghold.
Castles were tactically defensive but strategically offensive. Because they were so difficult to capture if
adequately defended, they provided a secure base from which a mobile force of warriors could extend political
control. A local lord installed himself inside with a professional force of fighting men to serve him. Castles
spread across Europe in the tenth and eleventh centuries in response to weak central authority and barbarian
raids from the north and east. Kings spent the rest of the Middle Ages trying to take back control of castles
raised by local lords. The development of dependable mobile heavy artillery in the fifteenth century finally
made castles obsolete.
Siege Workshop
The Siege Workshop is used to build siege weapons. Siege Work-
shop units can be garrisoned inside the Siege Workshop if you set a
gather point there while the units are being created. They cannot
reenter once ungarrisoned. You must have a Blacksmith before you
can build a Siege Workshop.
The construction of castles and fortified towns created demand for artillery engines that could knock down
walls and open the fortification to assault by troops. Without such artillery weapons, the taking of a castle
required a long and costly siege that eventually starved the defenders into surrender. The ability to lay siege
was constrained by the length of the campaigning season, the cost of providing supplies to a besieging army, the
losses from disease in camp, and weather. Battering rams, trebuchets, and other siege engines were used to break
into the fortification quickly and decide the issue. Siege engines were built at a siege workshop.
55
Gate
Gates allow your units to pass through walls. You can build Gates over
existing walls, and you can lock or unlock your Gates. You might lock a
Gate during an attack to prevent it from opening accidentally when a
friendly unit approaches. Gates automatically open and close for you
and your allies unless they are locked.
To lock and unlock Gates
Click a Gate, and then click the Lock Gate or
Unlock Gate button in the lower-left corner
of the screen.
Gates were built into walls to allow access to a fortification. Because gates could be the most vulnerable part of
a defensive position, extra care was taken to make them strong. A common type of gate was the portcullis, a
heavy metal grid that was raised by a winch. The portcullis was in place by grooves in the stonework of the
gateway and by its own weight. A long narrow passage, open from above, was usually placed behind the
portcullis. Attackers who managed to get past the gate would then remain vulnerable to fire from soldiers in
the narrow passage.
Palisade Wall
Palisade Walls are wooden walls that are cheap and fast to build. You can
construct them on the battlefield as temporary barriers to slow down your
enemies and warn you of their approach.
Barbarian tribes were migrating across Europe during the Dark Ages, being displaced by other migrations
from the East and searching for land to settle. Warrior bands roamed the landscape seeking plunder. In these
turbulent times, defensive precautions were taken. Villages were fortified with palisades — walls built of
wood. Although stone walls were preferable, wood was abundant and easy to use, and a palisade could be
erected in a fraction of the time a stone wall would take. At night the villagers would bring all their livestock,
goods, and tools inside the palisade for protection.
Stone Wall
Stone Walls are stronger than Palisade Walls but more expensive. They
slow down your enemies and give you the chance to fend them off. You
can upgrade your Stone Walls to Fortified Walls at the University.
Larger and more advanced civilizations upgraded their defenses to stone walls when they could. A well-built
stone wall offered protection against raiders because it could be broken down only by a determined effort. To
capture a walled town or castle might require a long siege or a battering by powerful siege engines. Stone walls
were expensive and time-consuming to build but worth the cost when guarding valuable locations. One
famous set of stone walls from the Middle Ages were those guarding the land approaches to Constantinople.
These walls withstood intermittent assault over a period of a thousand years. They were partly responsible for
56 Chapter VI - Buildings
deflecting barbarian tribes from the north and east toward Rome, even though Constantinople may have been
a more attractive prize. The other famous stone wall of the Middle Ages was the Great Wall of China.
Originally constructed in ancient times, it was extended and rebuilt in places by several dynasties. The frontier
of China was so long that the Great Wall could not be defended sufficiently to be a shield. It did serve to
provide warning of Mongol attack. Most importantly, it slowed the advance and withdrawal of raiders across
the frontier, giving the imperial armies a chance to intercept.
Fortified Wall
Fortified Walls are stronger than Stone Walls but expensive to upgrade
and slow to build. In Age of Empires II, Fortified Walls do not shoot at
enemies. However, the reinforced stone is difficult to breach without
siege weapons.
The fortified wall was an upgrade of the stone wall accomplished by building fighting positions into the wall
so that defenders could be more effective in repulsing assaults. Strong points and bastions allowed defenders to
shoot at enemies at the base of wall, where they might otherwise be safe. The three lines of stone walls outside
Constantinople were fortified with hundreds of towers, helping to make the defenses impregnable until the
advent of cannon.
Outpost
Outposts are stationary watch points that give you advance warning of
enemy activity nearby. They have a long line of sight, which can be
made longer by researching technologies at the Town Center. Unlike
the other towers, Outposts do not attack or allow you to garrison units
inside.
The world of 500 AD was far less populated than the world of today, and there were great expanses of empty
and desolate land. To keep watch at the frontier, lords established outposts that would provide early warning of
attack and report movements of settlers and trade caravans. As the land became more populated and more
settled, outposts were replaced by establishing castles and communities on borders.
Watch Tower
The Watch Tower is a simple stone tower that automatically attacks
enemy units and buildings within its range. Units can garrison inside for
protection and to add additional attack strength to the tower. You can
upgrade your Watch Towers to Guard Towers at the University.
Some of the earliest fortified stone structures were simple watch towers. From the watch tower a local lord
could keep a large area in view. The stone structure made it impregnable to assault except by a major force.
The lord could withdraw into the tower, putting his animals on the bottom, stores and treasure on a second
floor, living on upper floors, and fighting from the top. The Normans were famous for building stone watch
towers across their lands in Normandy and England to provide military and political control.
57
Guard Tower
The Guard Tower is an upgrade of the Watch Tower. It is stronger and
has greater fighting ability. Units can garrison inside for protection and
to add additional attack strength to the tower. You can upgrade your
Guard Towers to Keeps at the University.
The defensive tower continued to evolve during the Middle Ages by getting stronger, taller, and better designed
for fighting defense. Whereas some earlier watch towers had been square, guard towers were usually round to
eliminate a sharp corner that could be knocked off. Fighting positions at the top of a guard tower were
improved to protect defenders. Hoardings extended out from the top, allowing defenders to reach the bottom of
the guard tower with missiles. Entrances to guard towers were made more elaborate and more easily
defendable.
Keep
The Keep is an upgrade of the Guard Tower. It is stronger and has greater
fighting capability. Units can garrison inside for protection and to add
additional attack strength to the tower.
The central and strongest building inside a castle was called the keep. This was the last bastion of defense inside
if the walls and outside towers were taken. The remaining defenders withdrew into the keep for the final
defense. The keep was a mini-castle often constructed in place of a castle to cut expenses. Although much
smaller than castles, keeps could perform the same function on a smaller scale. They were very difficult to
capture except by a large and well-equipped army.
Bombard Tower
The Bombard Tower has extensive sight to track down enemies. You
must research Chemistry and Bombard Tower (at the University) before
you can build Bombard Towers. Because of the new architecture
involved, preexisting towers do not upgrade to Bombard Towers.
Acquiring this technology only allows you to build Bombard Towers.
By the end of the Middle Ages the development of cannon had changed military engineering by making
standard castles obsolete. Their high vertical walls were particularly susceptible to direct cannon fire aimed at
their base. Military engineers responded by building new structures that were less susceptible to cannon fire
and by mounting cannon within these structures to augment their defensive positions along coasts, at
important river crossings, and at other strategic points. These new bombard towers swept the approaches to
harbors and towns, making them more difficult to attack.
58 Chapter VI - Buildings
U nits
Chapter VII
Infantry
Infantry are foot soldiers used for hand-to-hand combat. They are relatively
cheap and quick to create. They are typically effective against buildings and
cavalry archers but weak against towers and siege weapons. You can create and
upgrade infantry units at the Barracks and improve their attack strength and
armor at the Blacksmith.
Militia
Most basic infantry unit; cheap and quick to create. Only
soldier created in Dark Age.
Created at Barracks
Strong vs. skirmishers, camels, Light Cavalry
Weak vs. archers, scorpions, cavalry archers, mangonels,
Cataphracts
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace
(Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor,
Plate Mail Armor (Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith
(Monastery)
Local peasants and workers called up for military duty in times of emergency made up the
militia. These temporary soldiers were usually equipped with second-rate weapons and
armor. They returned to their normal occupations when the emergency had passed. Levies of
militia were often used as second-line troops when great lords assembled their vassals for a
campaign. The militia was available for less demanding fighting and other tasks in support
of the main army. England’s Harold Godwinson stood his ground in 1066 at Hastings with
only his vassals. If he had fallen back and called up the Anglo-Saxon militia, known as the
furd, some historians believe he would not have lost his kingdom to William the Conqueror.
For much of the Dark Ages there were only small professional armies in the West. Militia led
by strong leaders and their few retainers carried on much of the Dark Age fighting.
59
Man-at-Arms
Stronger than Militia; cheap and quick to create.
Created at Barracks
Strong vs. skirmishers, camels, Light Cavalry
Weak vs. archers, scorpions, cavalry archers, mangonels, Cataphracts
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Men who had received weapons training and wore armor of some sort in battle were referred to as men-at-
arms. By definition, all knights were men-at-arms, but not all men-at-arms were knights. The class of men-
at-arms also included professional fighting men of no nobility called sergeants and knights in training called
squires. The armies of feudal lords were divided into two distinct groups, the men-at-arms of all classes and
the peasant militia. The trained fighting men provided the principal fighting power of the army. Men-at-
arms on foot fought with swords. This was an effective weapon and helped distinguish the men-at-arms from
soldiers of lower social standing like spearmen, skirmishers, and missile troops. Men-at-arms wore armor,
usually from head to toe, and were highly trained. They were especially effective against spearmen if they could
close under the spear points. They fought beside dismounted knights under certain conditions, such as castle
assaults. During the Hundred Years War, the English often fought dismounted because the French knights
usually outnumbered them by a large margin. On the open battlefield, a man-at-arms was at a great
disadvantage against a mounted knight. Knights kept a body of men-at-arms on retainer to help maintain
local order within the local fief and to accompany the knight when called up for military service.
Long Swordsman
Stronger than Man-at-Arms; cheap and quick to create.
Created at Barracks
Strong vs. skirmishers, camels, Light Cavalry
Weak vs. archers, scorpions, cavalry archers, mangonels, Cataphracts
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
60 Chapter VII - Units
The weapon of choice for noble warriors was the long sword. Being skilled with a sword was a social
distinction because good swords were expensive and difficult to make. Men-at-arms of lower classes trained
with shorter swords and less expensive weapons. Long swords were reserved for the nobility. The ceremony of
becoming a knight involved being dubbed with a long sword by the new knight’s lord.
Two-Handed Swordsman
Stronger than Long Swordsman; cheap and quick to create.
Created at Barracks
Strong vs. skirmishers, camels, Light Cavalry
Weak vs. archers, scorpions, cavalry archers, mangonels, Cataphracts
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
As armor improved, so did weapons. The two-handed sword was an innovation that allowed a man to swing
with the power of both arms, not just one. This was a long and heavy sword, and it required a strong and well-
trained man. The two-handed swordsman was a formidable adversary in hand-to-hand combat. Two-
handed swordsmen used no shield and relied on the power of their attack to overcome an opponent’s shield and
armor. Although he struck fewer times, each swing had the potential of being a mortal blow, regardless of the
armor and weapons of the defender.
Champion
Strongest infantry unit (aside from some civilizations’ unique units);
cheap and quick to create.
Created at Barracks
Strong vs. skirmishers, camels, Light Cavalry
Weak vs. archers, scorpions, cavalry archers, mangonels, Cataphracts
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Among the best swordsmen there were a few who, through their renown on the battlefield and in tournaments,
achieved the status of champion. Such men became war leaders and rose in social standing thanks to abilities
61
so highly regarded at the time. Lords kept champions on retainer for status and because staged fights between
elite warriors were used on occasion to resolve disputes. Having a great champion in your pay or as a vassal
was the Middle Age equivalent to having a good lawyer. Champions were professional warriors who might
also be members of the nobility. A successful champion might gain a noble title through tournament victory,
battle honors, or marriage. A minor knight in England named John Marshal was so successful in tournaments
that he rose to become a high-ranking noble of great wealth thanks to prizes and successive marriages to
admiring women of means.
Spearman
Medium infantry unit. Exceptional vs. cavalry.
Created at Barracks
Strong vs. skirmishers, Stable units
Weak vs. swordsmen, archers, scorpions, mangonels
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The medium infantry of medieval armies were often spearmen wearing half-armor, usually a helmet and
armor on the upper body. As the Middle Ages advanced, the role of the spearman became more important.
Armies learned to employ large formations of spearmen as a counter to heavy cavalry attacks because horses
would not charge home against a bristling wall of spear points. Spearmen were most effective when emulating
the ancient Greek phalanx, a dense box of men that could extend several spear points in a chosen direction. As
towns grew in importance toward the end of the period, they fielded large contingents of trained spearmen.
These were very effective in battle for the cost of their equipment and training. Spearmen were originally
deployed in a defensive posture, but the best of the spearman armies, such as the Swiss, Scots, and Flemish,
learned to maneuver and take the offensive.
Pikeman
Stronger than Spearman. Exceptional vs. cavalry.
Created at Barracks
Strong vs. skirmishers, Stable units
Weak vs. swordsmen, archers, scorpions, mangonels
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
62 Chapter VII - Units
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The success of spearmen against cavalry led to innovation in the equipment and tactics they used. Pikemen
were an innovation of towns and communities that did not have the resources to field large armies of heavy
cavalry. Pikes were cheap and could be quite effective with training. One important change was the
lengthening of the weapon shaft. Where the spear had been 6 to 8 feet long, the pike had a shaft up to 18 feet
long. The longer weapon meant that more spear points could be extended beyond the bodies of the men in the
front rank. Pikemen combined with crossbowmen or hand cannoneers to make a useful combined arms unit.
The pikemen prevented cavalry from overrunning the group, while the missile troops caused casualties to the
enemy at range. Working together, this combination dominated battlefields at the end of the age. As firearms
improved after the Middle Ages, the pikeman component became less necessary. The bayonet made the pike
component obsolete and allowed the musketeer to defend himself against cavalry.
Berserk & Elite Berserk
Viking unique unit created in Castle Age. Infantry unit that slowly heals
itself. (The Vikings are the only civilization with two unique units. The
Vikings also receive a Longboat, which may be built at the Dock once a
Viking Castle has been built.)
Created at Castle
Strong vs. skirmishers, camels, Light Cavalry
Weak vs. archers, scorpions, cavalry archers, mangonels, Cataphracts
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Late in the eighth century Viking sea raiders from Scandinavia appeared suddenly in Northern Europe. They
raided and plundered coastal communities for the next 150 years. Most of the progress made by Charlemagne
in uniting Northern Europe and beginning a rebirth of civilization was erased by the turmoil they caused. The
Vikings were known for their great seamanship and ferocity in battle. Witnesses claimed that Viking warriors
would occasionally go “berserk” and attack with nearly inhuman zeal, oblivious to all danger. Such behavior
was terrifying to behold and very difficult to withstand. The ability to go mad with battle lust was a powerful
attribute during a period of widespread superstition.
63
Huskarl & Elite Huskarl
Gothic unique unit created in Castle Age. Infantry with substantial
pierce armor; virtually immune to archer fire.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. archers
Weak vs. swordsmen
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Within the Germanic tribes that overran the Western Roman Empire and brought in the Dark Ages,
including the Goths, tribal leaders kept a personal retinue of warriors known as huskarls. These men served
their chiefs fanatically in return for a large share in any plunder the tribe could grab. Huskarls trained for
battle continuously and had few other duties. A chief had to be successful in acquiring plunder, however, or
risk being removed or abandoned. As the Dark Ages progressed, huskarls were absorbed into the feudal system
as vassals of lords. They remained a lord’s or king’s personal fighting force but often became responsible for
their own support on lands given to them by their chief. This system replaced much of the sharing of plunder.
Samurai & Elite Samurai
Japanese unique unit created in Castle Age. Infantry unit with fast
attack.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. infantry, unique units
Weak vs. archers
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
When knights were coming into dominance as lords and warriors in Europe, a similar social and military
change was taking place simultaneously in Japan. A weak central government and a scramble for control of
land gave rise in Japan to a local military ruling class called the samurai. These men of noble birth trained
continuously in the military arts, as well as various cultural arts. They put great emphasis on honor and
tradition, as did European knights with the code of chivalry. Samurai fought with a variety of weapons,
including the bow and their unique curved swords made of the strongest steel. They sought out high-ranking
enemies on the battlefield for personal duels and were trained to seek death in battle to increase their
aggression and avoid hesitancy.
64 Chapter VII - Units
Teutonic Knight & Elite Teutonic Knight
Teutonic unique unit created in Castle Age. Powerful armor; slow but
difficult to destroy. Receives benefits of infantry armor.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. swordsmen, skirmishers, Stable units
Weak vs. archers, scorpions, cavalry archers, mangonels, Monks
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
At the height of the Christian Crusades into the Holy Land, German crusaders formed an order of warrior
monks called the Teutonic Knights. This order gave up crusading in the Eastern Mediterranean and turned its
attention to Eastern Europe. Through conquest they brought Christianity to the Baltic region and forests of
what became Prussia. They built castles from which they could control the surrounding countryside. The
Teutonic Knights were committed warriors who carved out an empire that lasted into the twentieth century.
Throwing Axeman & Elite Throwing Axeman
Frank unique unit created in Castle Age. Ranged attack.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. Barracks units, skirmishers
Weak vs. archers
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The Franks took their name from the axe that was their preferred weapon in ancient times. They continued to
use the axe into the Dark Ages and their warriors were especially noted for their ability to throw this axe in
battle. The axe was well balanced and could be hurled a good distance by a strong man. Franks carried several
axes into battle, holding on to one for hand-to-hand combat. As they advanced they could pick up axes
thrown previously to replenish their supply of missiles. Throwing axemen were especially good against light
troops wearing little armor. Carrying axes was also useful for dismantling fortifications.
65
Woad Raider & Elite Woad Raider
Celtic unique unit created in Castle Age. Exceptionally quick infantry
unit.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. skirmishers, camels, Light Cavalry
Weak vs. archers, scorpions, cavalry archers, mangonels, Cataphracts
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Mail Armor, Chain Mail Armor, Plate Mail Armor
(Blacksmith)
Sight — Tracking (Barracks)
Speed — Squires (Barracks)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Woad is a plant found in the British Isles from which a blue pigment can be extracted. Celtic warriors painted
themselves with this pigment prior to battle to look more fearsome and unnerve their enemies. Celtic warriors
had been raiding more developed areas of Britain and Europe since ancient times. The Scots, for example, were
originally Irish raiders who took lands from the Picts in north Britain that became Scotland. When the
English sought to conquer the Celts inhabiting Ireland, Wales, and Scotland during the Middle Ages, the Celts
were at a great disadvantage against the English mounted knights. The Celts often turned to guerrilla tactics,
raiding English settlements and withdrawing before English armies. Raiders painted with woad devastated
the borderlands. A renowned woad raider was William Wallace of Scotland who rampaged through
Northern England for a decade.
Archers
Archers attack enemy units within range by firing arrows at them. They have a small,
randomly determined chance of missing their intended target. All are Weak vs. buildings
and walls. You can create archers at the Archery Range and improve their attack strength
and range by researching technology at the Blacksmith.
Archer
Quick and light. Weak at close range; excels at battle
from a distance.
Created at Archery Range
Strong vs. Barracks units, cavalry archers, Monks, Teutonic Knights, War
Elephants
Weak vs. skirmishers, knights, mangonels, Woad Raiders, Huskarls
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
66 Chapter VII - Units
Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The bow remained an important military weapon after the fall of Rome, although less so in areas of Europe
covered by dense forests. Archers could fight from a distance, from behind walls or other cover, and from
ambush. They were usually not decisive in battle on the attack because they could not physically take ground
from the enemy like infantry could. They acted mainly as defensive troops and as light troops that disrupted
enemy formations prior to the decisive moment when the armies clashed hand-to-hand. If barrages of arrows
could cause casualties and drain the fighting spirit of the enemy prior to the clash, friendly troops had a better
chance of breaking the will of the enemy and being victorious. Archers were also very useful when both
defending and attacking a castle.
Crossbowman
Quick and light. Weak at close range; excels at battle from a distance.
Created at Archery Range
Strong vs. Barracks units, cavalry archers, Monks, Teutonic Knights, War
Elephants
Weak vs. skirmishers, knights, mangonels, Woad Raiders, Huskarls
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The crossbow was a missile weapon consisting of a bow on its side attached to the end of a wood stock. The
stock was held against the shoulder like a modern rifle and a trigger fired the weapon. The crossbow had been
invented in ancient China but was not used widely in Europe until the Middle Ages. It fired short quarrels,
stones, or metal balls rather than arrows. It was a powerful weapon but limited to a shorter range than the best
bows. It was simple to use, relatively cheap to make, and deadly. A peasant with only a few hours of crossbow
practice could easily kill an elite knight encased in armor worth a fortune who had trained for war throughout
his life. The knights in Europe at one point attempted to get the Church to ban the weapon. Richard the
Lionhearted, King of England, died from a crossbow quarrel wound received during a siege.
67
Arbalest
Quick and light. Weak at close range; excels at battle from a distance.
Created at Archery Range
Strong vs. Barracks units, cavalry archers, Monks, Teutonic Knights, War
Elephants
Weak vs. skirmishers, knights, mangonels, Woad Raiders, Huskarls
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The arbalest was an advanced crossbow made of steel. The greater tensile strength of steel gave the weapon
greater power.
Skirmisher
Ranged unit equipped with armor vs. archer
attacks. Exceptional vs. archers.
Created at Archery Range
Strong vs. archers, Monks, cavalry archers
Weak vs. Barracks units, mangonels
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching,
Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Black-
smith)
Armor — Padded Archer Armor,
Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Targeting — Ballistics (Univer-
sity)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Many armies of the Middle Ages used lightly armored skirmishers in support of the main fighting force of
armored fighting men. They could be difficult to control and of little value on the battlefield, but some armies
used them effectively. Skirmishers were deployed in front of the main battle line and engaged the enemy with
bows, slings, and javelins. The intent was to disrupt the enemy force and cause casualties before the main battle
lines clashed. The skirmishers would retire to the side of the main battle and harass the enemy as practical.
They could also be useful in pursuit of a beaten enemy because they could move more quickly than men
wearing armor. If caught in battle against men-at-arms, however, they could not stand and routed quickly.
68 Chapter VII - Units
Elite Skirmisher
Ranged unit equipped with armor vs. archer attacks. Exceptional vs.
archers.
Created at Archery Range
Strong vs. archers, Monks, cavalry archers
Weak vs. Barracks units, mangonels
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
In many Middle Age armies skirmishers were the rabble that was thrown in at the start of a battle and then
often overrun by the heavy cavalry of both sides. A few armies trained elite skirmishers who could disrupt
enemy formations, fall back, and support the main friendly fighting force from the sides. An army that could
put elite skirmishers in the field to support its main army had an advantage over an army that did not. The
Swiss, for example, often employed up to a quarter of their force in a skirmish role. Elite Swiss skirmishers
supported the dense phalanxes of Swiss pikemen by disrupting enemy troops before the pikes made their
attack. In an emergency, the skirmishers could take cover under the rows of pointed pikes and then stand up
once more to engage a withdrawing enemy.
Cavalry Archer
Fast, with ranged attack. Ideal for hit-and-run attacks.
Created at Archery Range
Strong vs. swordsmen, Monks, Teutonic Knights, War Elephants
Weak vs. archers, skirmishers, Light Cavalry
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Archers mounted on horses originated in ancient times on the great plains of Asia and continued to make up
the bulk of the armies from this region throughout the Middle Ages. The Mongol armies that conquered most
of Asia, the Middle East, and much of Europe were predominately cavalry archers. For the time they were a
unique combination of firepower and speed. They could cross almost any kind of terrain quickly, strike
69
unexpectedly, and withdraw if necessary before heavy cavalry or infantry units could react. The Mongols
especially mastered the tactics of hitting, running, and ambushing, avoiding hand-to-hand fighting until the
enemy was completely demoralized. Cavalry archers were most effective on open ground with plenty of
maneuvering room. They were least effective against fortified positions that could not be starved out and
required a hand-to-hand assault.
Heavy Cavalry Archer
Fast, with ranged attack. Ideal for hit-and-run attacks.
Created at Archery Range
Strong vs. swordsmen, Monks, Teutonic Knights, War Elephants
Weak vs. archers, skirmishers, Light Cavalry
Upgrades Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Attack — Chemistry (University)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Cavalry archers could be a devastating force when skilled and properly used, but they were as susceptible to
archery fire as their enemies. One innovation intended to make them less vulnerable was to equip them with
helmets and chest armor. This created the heavy cavalry archer, which was less nimble than its unarmored
counterparts but able to engage in combat while taking fewer casualties. The Byzantines made extensive use of
heavy cavalry archers in the engagements with horsemen from Persia and great plains to their north.
Hand Cannoneer
Powerful close attack; inaccurate at range. Keeps non-ranged units from
closing on other units. Requires Chemistry.
Created at Archery Range
Strong vs. Barracks units, Monks, Teutonic Knights
Weak vs. archers, mangonels
Upgrades Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Following the development of cannons, small hand-operated gunpowder weapons began appearing in Europe
in the fourteenth century. These early firearms were small iron tubes mounted on a wooden stock. They were
inaccurate and slow to load. In the early fifteenth century the hand cannon was made smaller, the stock was
70 Chapter VII - Units
redesigned so it could be held against the chest, and a mechanism was added for inserting the slow-burning
match into the chamber. This weapon was effective only in volleys at close range. In the middle of the fifteenth
century the first recognizably modern firearm, the arquebus, was developed. This employed a wheel lock to
bring the slow match in contact with a powder pan connected by a tube to the chamber. Lead and cast iron
balls fired from the arquebus were lethal. Firearms of the Middle Ages had an inferior range and rate of fire in
comparison to the best bows and crossbows. Firearms improved gradually, however, and became more and
more popular, despite their high cost. They became status symbols. Important lords engaged in an arms race,
attempting to field more firearms of more modern design than their competitors.
Chu Ko Nu & Elite Chu Ko Nu
Chinese unique unit created in Castle Age. Archer with mediocre range
that causes great damage. Can fire arrows very quickly.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. Barracks units, cavalry archers, Monks, Teutonic Knights, War
Elephants
Weak vs. skirmishers, knights, mangonels, Woad Raiders, Huskarls
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The crossbow was invented in China in ancient times and the chu ko nu was an improved crossbow invented
there during European Middle Ages. The chu ko nu was something like a semi-automatic crossbow. It was
fitted with a magazine of bolts. When the operator pulled back the bowstring, a new bolt was automatically
loaded. When the bowstring reached its limit, the weapon fired automatically. The operator pulled back as
quickly as he could to maintain a rapid fire. The weaknesses of the weapon were a short range and weaker
power compared to larger single-shot crossbows.
Janissary & Elite Janissary
Turk unique unit created in Castle Age. Hand Cannoneer with longer
and no minimum range. Powerful close attack; inaccurate at range.
Keeps non-ranged units from closing on other units.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. Barracks units, Monks, Teutonic Knights
Weak vs. archers, mangonels
Upgrades Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
71
Some of the best units in the Turkish armies were the janissaries. These men were slaves captured as children
and raised under Islam to be fanatical warriors. They wore distinctive white headgear and marched into
battle accompanied by music. They fought on foot with a variety of weapons, including early firearms when
these weapons reached the Middle East. The military was their entire life and they took great pride in their
ability. They led the successful assault into Constantinople and the unsuccessful Turkish attacks against Malta
and Vienna.
Longbowman & Elite Longbowman
Briton unique unit created in Castle Age. Powerful with long range.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. Barracks units, cavalry archers, Monks, Teutonic Knights, War
Elephants
Weak vs. skirmishers, knights, mangonels, Woad Raiders, Huskarls
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The longbow was very tall, 5 or 6 feet long, and crafted from a single piece of wood, commonly yew. It fired 3-
foot-long arrows at a great range and, in the hands of an expert, could be extremely accurate. Edward I
(Longshanks) of England grasped the value of this weapon and the English thereafter employed large
contingents of longbowmen in their Middle Age armies. All sports other than archery were banned on
Sundays in Britain to ensure that archers practiced. The long bow was used effectively in long-range barrages
against massed troops, firing thin pointed arrows called bodkins that could pierce armor. Arrows were fired
simultaneously by thousands of archers and aimed at a distant area rather than a specific target. Enemy troops
within the area were forced to receive the barrage with no cover but their armor and shields. The barrage
caused casualties and reduced enemy morale. The most famous examples of this tactic were the great English
victories at Crécy, Poitiers, and Agincourt during the Hundred Years War. French knights recalled with horror
the awful sound of thousands of arrows in flight and the sky turning dark from their shafts.
Mangudai & Elite Mangudai
Mongol unique unit created in Castle Age. Cavalry archer with attack
bonus vs. siege weapons.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. swordsmen, Monks, Teutonic Knights, War Elephants, siege
weapons
Weak vs. archers, skirmishers, Light Cavalry
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
72 Chapter VII - Units
Armor — Padded Archer Armor, Leather Archer Armor, Ring
Archer Armor (Blacksmith)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The Mongols were united by Genghis Khan, who took them off on a campaign of conquest that reached from
the Pacific to the Mediterranean to Central Europe. The Mongols were superb horsemen and each warrior
kept a stable of ponies so that fresh mounts were always available. The strength of the Mongol armies was the
horse archer firing a composite bow from the saddle. The best of these archers, called the mangudai, used great
tactics to catch enemies at a disadvantage. They used feints and traps to wear out enemy cavalry and shoot it
to pieces. Slower troops could be shot to pieces at range with little risk. Enemy armies were exhausted and
shattered without ever coming to grips with the elusive mangudai. The main weakness of the Mongol army
was that only great leaders could keep it together. When the great Khan or later leaders died, the army
dissolved into factions bickering for primacy.
Cavalry
Cavalry units are used for scouting and combat. You can create cavalry units at the Stable
and improve them by researching technology at the Blacksmith.
Scout Cavalry
Fast with extensive sight; resistant to conversion.
Created at Stable
Strong vs. archers, mangonels, cavalry archers, Bombard Cannons, Monks
Weak vs. Pikemen, knights, camels
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Metallurgy (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
In a Random Map game, each player begins with one Scout Cavalry unit that can be used
to explore the map. Additional Scout Cavalry units may be produced at the Stable
beginning in the Feudal Age.
The importance of fast horse units for scouting had been learned in ancient times and carried forward into the
Middle Ages. Even Middle Age armies built around heavy knights maintained a force of lightly armored scout
73
cavalry to act as the eyes of an army on the march. Scout cavalry employed horses bred for stamina and speed.
They would range far in advance and to the flanks of an army to gather information about enemy move-
ments. Scout cavalry were less useful in battle because the men wore little armor and light weapons. They were
very useful, however, once an enemy was defeated and routing. Then scout cavalry were effective in running
down fleeing survivors and capturing equipment, wagons, and prisoners.
Light Cavalry
Fast with greater line of sight than Scout Cavalry; resistant to
conversion.
Created at Stable
Strong vs. archers, mangonels, cavalry archers, Bombard Cannons, Monks
Weak vs. Pikemen, knights, camels
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
As Middle Age armies grew larger and campaigned farther afield, the importance of scouting grew. Many
civilizations developed light cavalry, an improvement on scout cavalry, for this role. Light cavalry were better
trained and better equipped for fighting. In battle they could be used to harass or charge enemy infantry or
support their own knights in a charge. Light cavalry wore only partial armor and a shield and fought most
commonly with a spear. Civilizations that could not afford extensive armor for warriors, such as barbarian
groups from the East, put large contingents of light cavalry into the field.
Knight
Heavy and quick.
Created at Stable
Strong vs. archers
Weak vs. Pikemen, camels, Mamelukes
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The knight was a heavily armored and mounted warrior who had achieved certain minimums in training
and position in Middle Age society. When made a knight, the warrior was often given land to support his
military expenses in return for a pledge to serve his lord on campaign for so many weeks each year. By
74 Chapter VII - Units
parceling out land in this manner, a high lord controlled a hierarchy of soldiers that could be called upon when
needed. Knights spent most of their time fighting or training for fighting. They practiced war in tournaments,
competing for prizes and honors. Because few others could afford the equipment and training for war, knights
dominated Middle Age battlefields for centuries. The evolution of new tactics featuring pikemen,
longbowmen, crossbowmen, and primitive handguns brought the dominance of heavy cavalry to an end.
Cavalier
Heavy and quick.
Created at Stable
Strong vs. archers
Weak vs. Pikemen, camels, Mamelukes
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
There was a hierarchy among knights based on feudal rank and fighting prowess. A lowly knight might
achieve great social standing through battlefield commendation, tournament victory, or marriage. Elite
knights were made members of important orders, like the Order of the Garter or of the Golden Fleece. Such
elite men were known as chevaliers or cavaliers. The first cavaliers were selected for their political power and
fighting prowess. As the centuries passed, the orders became more of a social elite.
Paladin
Heavy and quick.
Created at Stable
Strong vs. archers
Weak vs. Pikemen, camels, Mamelukes
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The ultimate fighting knights were paladins, the cream of the cavalier class. Paladins were champions for their
lords and their orders of knighthood. These men were of the highest social class and elite warriors. They often
made up the personal bodyguard of a great king and were sworn to protect his life with their own.
75
Camel
Excels at killing other mounted units.
Created at Stable
Strong vs. knights, Cataphracts
Weak vs. infantry, archers
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The camel was a useful mount for warriors in desert regions of the world because it could move quickly across
sand and could go long periods without water. In addition, horses shied away from the presence of camels. The
Saracens made good use of camels during the Crusades; camel riders appeared out of the desert to raid
Crusader outposts and caravans and then escaped back into terrain that horses could not cross.
Heavy Camel
Excels at killing other mounted units.
Created at Stable
Strong vs. knights, Cataphracts
Weak vs. infantry, archers
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The heavy camel was an especially experienced warrior and camel rider who wore some armor. They were
used by desert civilizations of the Middle East who fought against archers from the Byzantine Empire and
horse archers raiding down from the steppes of Asia.
76 Chapter VII - Units
Cataphract & Elite Cataphract
Byzantine unique unit created in Castle Age. Heavily armored. Attack
bonus vs. infantry.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. swordsmen, archers
Weak vs. knights, camels
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The Byzantine army carried on many of the military traditions of the old Roman Empire into the Middle
Ages. This was a professional force that was well trained and well led. Officers studied tactics and command.
The army was organized into formal units that maintained their own traditions for centuries. The best units
in the Byzantine army were partially armored cavalrymen called cataphracts. They fought with several
weapons, including the bow and sword. With plains to the east and north of their empire, the cataphract was
ideally suited for combat against the unarmored cavalry of their enemies. The Byzantine army went into
decline partially because it lost the plains of Asia Minor from which it had drawn both horses and cavalrymen
for service as cataphracts.
Mameluke & Elite Mameluke
Saracen unique unit created in Castle Age. Camel with ranged attack.
Excels vs. other mounted units.
Created at Castle
Strong vs. Barracks units, Monks, Teutonic Knights
Weak vs. archers, mangonels
Upgrades Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The mamelukes were slaves trained as warriors by various Arab leaders, partially because early believers in
Islam would not fight each other. Slave warriors got around this ban. The mamelukes were well trained and
highly motivated. A mameluke army from Eg ypt won a rare victory against the Mongols in Syria, turning
these barbarian horsemen back from the Nile and North Africa. In time the mamelukes rose up against their
Arab rulers and took control themselves. When Napoleon invaded Eg ypt in the eighteenth century, he defeated
a mameluke army at the Battle of the Pyramids.
77
C r e a t e d a t S t r o n g v s. We a k v s. U p g ra d e s War Elephant & Elite War Elephant
Persian unique unit created in Castle Age. Slow, powerful, well armored,
and difficult to destroy. Elite War Elephant causes area of effect damage;
can hit several adjacent targets simultaneously.
Castle
swordsmen, archers
Pikemen, camels, Monks, Mamelukes
Attack — Forging, Iron Casting, Blast Furnace (Blacksmith)
Armor — Scale Barding Armor, Chain Barding Armor, Plate
Barding Armor (Blacksmith)
Speed — Husbandry (Stable)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The last civilization in the Middle East to employ war elephants was Persia, who got their elephants from
India. The war elephant was a powerful complement to an army, especially against troops with no experience
against them. They were very difficult to kill, but remained difficult to control also. If they could be directed
into an enemy formation, the enemy troops almost always fell back in disarray.
Siege weapons
Siege weapons are used to destroy enemy defenses such as walls, towers, and buildings.
Most siege weapons cause graduated damage (the most damage occurs at the point of
impact with diminishing levels of damage radiating out). You can build siege weapons at
the Siege Workshop.
B u i l t a t S t r o n g v s. We a k v s. U p g ra d e s Scorpion & Heavy Scorpion
Fires large arrow-like bolts. Effective vs. large masses of
units; shots hit multiple units causing damage to all units they touch.
Siege Workshop
Barracks units, archers, Monks
Stable units, Woad Raiders
Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith);
Siege Engineers (Blacksmith)
Tracking — Ballistics (University)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The scorpion represents a light artillery weapon that fired large arrow-like bolts, small stones, or iron balls.
These weapons came in a variety of sizes and looked like large crossbows. Scorpions might be mounted on
tripods or more substantial wooden frames. They were used primarily in siege attacks but could also be
deployed in a set position on a battlefield. They were useful against massed enemy troops, especially cavalry,
and against fortifications.
78 Chapter VII - Units
The heavy scorpion was an improved version of the Scorpion. The heavy scorpion consisted of a heavier bow
and frame, and could fire larger missiles
Bombard Cannon
Powerful mobile anti-building siege weapon. Requires Chemistry.
Built at Siege Workshop
Strong vs. Barracks units, archers, skirmishers, Monks
Weak vs. Stable units, Woad Raiders
Upgrades Range, Attack — Siege Engineers (University)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Gunpowder reached Europe from China by the thirteenth century and primitive cannons appeared first in the
fourteenth century. Bombard cannons were large, ponderous, and dangerous to fire because the guns tended to
break and because gunpowder was of uneven quality. They were used mainly in sieges where the time was
available to set them up and fire them at a fixed target. By the fifteenth century, bombard cannons firing stone
or iron shot were making castles obsolete. Cannons could bring down vertical stone walls quickly by firing shot
at high velocity directly into the lower wall sections. Giant bombard cannons manned by European
mercenaries were instrumental in the Turkish attack that finally captured Constantinople in 1453.
Battering Ram
Slow, lumbering; reduces enemy towns to ruins.
Built at Siege Workshop
Strong vs. archers, cavalry archers
Weak vs. Barracks units, Stable units
Upgrades Attack — Siege Engineers (University)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The most direct way to attack a stone wall or other stone fortification was to knock it down with a battering
ram. The typical ram was a stout log mounted on wheels or suspended from a frame so it could swing forward
and backward. The frame was brought up to the wall or gate to be battered and then men heaving in unison
repeatedly slammed the ram head into the target. The battering ram frame required a roof of some sort to
protect the crew from above. This was often covered with wet animal hides to retard fire. Given enough time,
any obstruction could be knocked down, opening a breach for assault.
79
Capped Ram
Slow, lumbering; reduces enemy towns to ruins.
Built at Siege Workshop
Strong vs. archers, cavalry archers
Weak vs. Barracks units, Stable units
Upgrades Attack — Siege Engineers (University)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Rams were simple and effective weapons for breaking into fortifications. The typical battering ram was a
stout log mounted on wheels or suspended from a frame so it could swing forward and backward. Any wall
could be knocked down given enough time. Capping the point of a battering ram with iron greatly improved
the battering ram. The capped ram did more damage and lasted longer before needing replacement.
Siege Ram
Slow, lumbering; reduces enemy towns to ruins.
Built at Siege Workshop
Strong vs. archers, cavalry archers
Weak vs. Barracks units, Stable units
Upgrades Attack — Siege Engineers (University)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The ultimate battering ram was the siege ram. This was a large engine that was heavily protected and
designed to hit with a powerful force. Siege rams were often prefabricated weapons that were hauled to the site
of the siege and assembled on the spot.
Mangonel, Onager & Siege Onager
Wheeled siege weapon used to attack a small mass of units. Area of
effect attack. Can attack ground. Siege Onagers can cut paths through
forests.
Built at Siege Workshop
Strong vs. Barracks units, archers
Weak vs. Stable units, Woad Raiders
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Range, Attack — Siege Engineers (University)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The mangonel was an improvement on the ancient catapult that was used to throw stones and other missiles,
usually in a siege attack against a fortified position. The mangonel usually fired directly at a target, using a
bar to stop the throwing arm when it was vertical. This threw the missile directly forward. Mangonels were
80 Chapter VII - Units
used to fire one large stone or a basket of smaller stones. They were often assembled on the spot for use, but
were also built on wheeled frames for easier movement.
The onager was an improvement of the mangonel; it was larger, more powerful, and hurled a heavier payload
for greater distance. The siege onager was the largest upgrade of the onager line of weapons. It had the longest
range and did the most damage.
Trebuchet
Powerful; destroys buildings, walls from distance. Cannot fire on close
units. Must be packed to move, unpacked to attack. Can cut paths
through forests.
Built at Castle
Strong vs. archers, skirmishers
Weak vs. swordsmen, Stable units, Mangudai, Woad Raiders
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Range, Attack — Siege Engineers (University)
Unit creation speed — Conscription (Castle)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
When you build a Trebuchet, it is packed and must be unpacked and assembled before it
can attack.
To pack/unpack a Trebuchet
Click the Trebuchet, and then click the
Pack or Unpack button.
To attack with a packed Trebuchet
Click the packed Trebuchet, and then
right-click an enemy target.
The Trebuchet moves within range of
the enemy target, unpacks, and begins
attacking.
The most powerful of the Middle Age nongunpowder siege engines was the trebuchet. This was a large
catapult-like weapon with a long throwing arm and missile bag suspended by ropes. When released the arm
swung up and the bag was brought up and forward. Centrifugal force acting on the suspended bag increased
the range and height achieved by the released missile. Stones fired by the Trebuchet plunged down on their
target and did great damage to the tops and roofs of walls, towers, and other structures. Trebuchets were
expensive and complicated machines, requiring specialists to build and operate. They could only be moved in
parts and required assembly before use. Edward I of England refused the surrender of Stirling Castle in
Scotland on one occasion so that he could watch his most recently acquired Trebuchet in action.
81
Ships
Ships are used to fish, trade with other players, transport units across water, and engage in
combat. You can build ships and research technologies that improve them at the Dock.
Fishing Ship
Gathers food from jumping fish and Fish Traps;
automatically returns fish to Dock. Can build Fish Traps.
Built at Dock
Upgrades Armor — Careening (Dock)
Speed — Dry Dock (Dock)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The technolog y of shipbuilding, sailing, and navigation improved substantially during the Middle Ages. One
result of these advances was a greater range and efficiency for Fishing Ships. The rich waters off the coasts of
Europe, North Africa, and Asia provided a bounty of seafood that could be preserved by drying and salting.
Preserved fish, especially cod, became an important trade good in the late Middle Ages.
Trade Cog
Trades by sea; takes goods from your Dock to a foreign Dock and brings
back gold. The farther the Dock, the higher your profit.
Built at Dock
Upgrades Armor — Careening (Dock)
Speed — Dry Dock (Dock)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
To trade using a Trade Cog
Click the Trade Cog, and then right-click a foreign Dock.
For more information on trading, see Chapter V.
The demands of trade along the northern coasts of Europe led to the development of new types of ships with
wide beams, deep drafts, square sails, stern rudders, and large cargo space. Ships of this new design were called
cogs and they dominated Middle Age sea commerce from the Baltic Sea to the Western Mediterranean.
Because these ships could not be drawn up on a beach easily, ports required piers extending out into water
sufficiently deep to keep the cogs afloat. The Far Eastern equivalent to the trade cog was the Chinese junk, a
much more advanced ship not surpassed in the West for many centuries.
82 Chapter VII - Units
Fire Ship & Fast Fire Ship
Spew fire at other ships.
Built at Dock
Strong vs. galleys, Longboats
Weak vs. demolition ships
Upgrades Armor — Careening (Dock)
Speed — Dry Dock (Dock)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The Byzantines alone in the West carried forward the ancient traditions of ship building into the Middle Ages.
Their improvement over the trireme was the fire ship, a narrow and fast warship powered by both oars and
lateen sails. The fighting power of these ships was provided partly by marines, archers, and catapults, but the
secret weapon of the Byzantine navy was Greek fire. This extremely volatile mixture was squirted out of hoses
from the bow of the fire ship and ignited on contact with air. Fire was a devastating weapon against wooden
ships and the enemies of the Byzantines could not stand up to fire ships spraying Greek fire. Other civilizations
acquired the secret of Greek fire at times, but it was so closely guarded and dangerous to use that it is lost today.
The fire ship was improved over the years to increase its speed, maneuverability, and armor. Constantinople
was successfully defended by its navy of fast fire ships for many centuries.
Cannon Galleon & Elite Cannon Galleon
Long-range warship used to attack targets on shore to establish a
beachhead. Fires slowly, with minimum range. Requires Chemistry.
Built at Dock
Weak vs. galleys, fire ships, demolition ships
Upgrades Armor — Careening (Dock)
Speed — Dry Dock (Dock)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Primitive cannon were first mounted on ships in the fourteenth century. These were mounted in the stern or
bow for firing forward or aft. Small weapons were mounted on the rails for use against enemy crews in close
action. The first ship built specifically for carrying cannon appeared in 1406. Effectively mounting a large
number of cannons on a ship took many years to work out. It required new designs to compensate for the
enormous weight of the guns high on the ship’s sides. Tackle had to be designed to allow the guns to be fired and
reloaded safely. Safe procedures were also needed for storing and accessing powder. Useful cannon galleons did
not appear until late in the Middle Ages.
83
Transport Ship
Moves units across water.
Built at Dock
Upgrades Armor and Capacity — Careening (Dock)
Speed and Capacity — Dry Dock (Dock)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
For more information about moving units, see Chapter IV.
Trading ships of all kinds were requisitioned when armies were moved overseas. Such ships were usually
modified into transports to better accommodate troops, horses, livestock, siege equipment, and supplies.
England was invaded on several occasions during the Middle Ages, including the early Saxon/Angle/Jute
invasions, numerous Norse invasions (the Danes ruled much of England temporarily), and the later Norman
invasion of 1066. The Normans also invaded Sicily and southern Italy. Many of the Crusades involved sea
movement from France to the Holy Land. The English brought armies into France several times during the
Hundred Year’s War.
Demolition Ship & Heavy Demolition Ship
Filled with explosives. Pilot near enemy ships and detonate to wrest
control of the sea from an entrenched opponent.
Built at Dock
Strong vs. fire ships
Weak vs. galleys, Longboats, Bombard Cannons
Upgrades Armor — Careening (Dock)
Speed — Dry Dock (Dock)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Kings and civilizations without a naval tradition turned to a simple expedient when facing a naval
engagement. They loaded an expendable ship with combustibles and a skeleton crew. The doomed ship was
then sailed into contact with enemy ships and set alight. When done properly, demolition ships burned fiercely
and exploded, setting adjacent enemy ships on fire also. Wooden ships sealed with pitch and outfitted with
flammable rigging and equipment were at great risk to fire and explosion (once gunpowder was aboard). A
demolition ship could damage or destroy ships many more times more powerful and valuable and could be
used against seaside buildings.
Demolition ships eventually were made larger and filled them with explosives of greater power, especially
gunpowder. This heavy demolition ship resulted in greater explosions and a greater chance of damaging or
destroying one or more enemy ships. It could be devastating against a large target or many enemy ships caught
traveling close together.
84 Chapter VII - Units
Galley
Small, basic, fast ship with weak attack. Scouts water for early attacks
and enemy fishing fleets.
Built at Dock
Strong vs. demolition ships, cannon galleons
Weak vs. fire ships, Bombard Cannons
Upgrades Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Armor — Careening (Dock)
Speed — Dry Dock (Dock)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Warships largely disappeared in Europe during the Dark Ages because no civilization other than the
Byzantines possessed the wealth and organization necessary for maintaining any sort of navy. As the centuries
passed, a few small warships again appeared in the Western Mediterranean. These were oar-powered galleys
used primarily for scouting and chasing down pirates that plagued sea trade. The best warships in the West
were built and maintained by the Byzantines, who alone had carried on their shipbuilding traditions since
ancient times.
War Galley
Medium combat ship.
Built at Dock
Strong vs. demolition ships, cannon galleons
Weak vs. fire ships, Bombard Cannons
Upgrades Armor — Careening (Dock)
Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Speed — Dry Dock (Dock)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The war galley was a larger and improved fighting ship. It carried a larger contingent of marines and archers.
When necessary, the equivalent of a war galley was created by putting fighting towers at the stern and bow of
trading ship. These provided better protection and a height advantage for archers when closed with an enemy
ship.
85
Galleon
Improved combat ship.
Built at Dock
Strong vs. demolition ships, cannon galleons
Weak vs. fire ships, Bombard Cannons
Upgrades Armor — Careening (Dock)
Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Speed — Dry Dock (Dock)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The galleon was a sailing ship outfitted for war, the largest fighting ship used in the West prior to the
mounting of cannons on board. This large and sturdy ship carried a large contingent of fighting men and
possibly some heavier siege artillery. The crew would attempt to board and capture an enemy ship in hand-
to-hand fighting. Catapults or large crossbows provided additional firepower.
Longboat & Elite Longboat
Viking unique unit created in Castle Age. (The Vikings are the only
civilization with two unique units. The Viking Longboat may be built at
a Dock once a Viking Castle has been built.)
Built at Dock
Strong vs. demolition ships, cannon galleons
Weak vs. fire ships, Bombard Cannons
Upgrades Armor — Careening (Dock)
Attack — Chemistry (University)
Attack, Range — Fletching, Bodkin Arrow, Bracer (Blacksmith)
Speed — Dry Dock (Dock)
Targeting — Ballistics (University)
Lower cost — Shipwright (Dock)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
The Viking raiders of the ninth through eleventh centuries were especially terrifying because they could strike
anywhere along the seacoast and even upriver. They had this capability thanks to their longboats. These ships
were long, narrow, and of shallow draft, but were surprisingly seaworthy. They used oars and a single square
sail for propulsion. Longboats could be taken into very shallow water and beached. Only a coast with high
bluffs or rocky shoreline was safe from them.
86 Chapter VII - Units
Other units
Villager
Gathers wood, food, gold, and stone. Builds and repairs
buildings. Repairs buildings, ships, and siege weapons.
Created at Town Center
Upgrades HP, armor, efficiency — Loom, Wheelbarrow, Hand Cart (Town
Center)
Attack — Sappers (Castle)
Resource-gathering — Double-Bit Axe, Bow Saw, Two-Man Saw;
Stone Mining, Gold Mining, Stone Shaft Mining, Gold Shaft
Mining (Lumber Camp, Mining Camp); Heavy Plow (Town
Center)
Build speed — Treadmill Crane (University)
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
Villagers perform the economic work for your civilization. They chop wood, mine stone
and gold, hunt, forage, fish, herd sheep, and farm. They also construct buildings and
repair damaged buildings, ships, and siege weapons. If necessary, they can also engage in
combat. Villager gender is randomly determined when you create a new villager. They
perform the same tasks regardless of their gender.
The great percentage of people in the Middle Ages were
peasants, serfs, and lowly villagers who gathered the food
and did most of the work. They supported a relatively
small class of religious leaders and nobleman who
controlled the wealth and power of the community. The
life of the peasant and serf was hard but improved as
feudalism gave way to social systems that allowed the
workers to retain more of their produce. Many peasants
moved into the middle class of the growing cities. Those
who remained on the farms saw their production and
wealth increase thanks to specialization and many
technological improvements in agriculture.
87
Relic
Special objects placed randomly on the map. Can only be moved by
Monks. When garrisoned in a Monastery, generate gold for your
civilization. Cannot be destroyed.
You can win most games by controlling all relics, as explained in Chapter II. There are
multiple relics in each game.
The influence of religion in daily life during the Middle Ages, especially in Europe, was exemplified by the
attraction and trafficking of religious relics. The burial sites of saints became the focus of pilgrimages. A
church or monastery that owned even a few bones from a saint or a small piece of the true cross drew pilgrims.
In time a market for saintly bones developed and rich men competed to acquire such relics and endow them to
local religious institutions. Attracting pilgrims and believers was good for the local economy. The most famous
relic of the period is the Shroud of Turin, purported to be the burial shroud of Jesus Christ. This shroud was
acquired in the Middle East and brought to Italy in the late Middle Ages.
Monk
Slow and weak. Converts enemy units, ships, and some buildings to your
civilization (player color). Heals wounded villagers, military units
(except siege weapons and ships).
Created at Monastery
Strong vs. Teutonic Knights, War Elephants
Weak vs. archers, knights, Light Cavalry, Woad Raiders
Upgrades (all at Monastery)
Convert some buildings, siege units — Redemption
Movement speed — Fervor
HP — Sanctity
Convert other Monks — Atonement
Greater conversion range — Block Printing
Less rejuvenation time — Illumination
Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith
For more information about Monks’ abilities, see Chapter IV; for more information about
how to improve your Monks, see Chapter VIII.
Religion was a powerful force during the Middle Ages, whether it was Roman Catholicism of the West, Islam
in the Middle East, or Buddhism in Asia. The missionaries and teachers of religion were mainly monks, men
who took vows of poverty and who dedicated their lives to spreading their message. Middle Age conflicts often
derived from religious differences and were led or supported by contingents of monks on each side. The
Crusades, for example, were multiple attempts by European Christians to wrest control of the Holy Land from
the hands of Islamic Arabs. Large numbers of monks accompanied the Christian crusading armies.
88 Chapter VII - Units
Trade Cart
Carries goods to foreign Markets and brings back gold as profit.
Distant Markets are the most profitable.
Built at Market
Upgrades Your units resistant to other Monks — Faith (Monastery)
To trade using a Trade Cart
Click the Trade Cart, and then right-click a foreign Market.
For more information on trading, see Chapter V.
The trade cart represents the wagon, pack horses, and other means of land transport used for the overland
trade of goods during the Middle Ages. One important land trade route was the movement of wool from
England across the Channel into France. The wool was manufactured into cloth and this cloth was carried
into Italy to exchange for spices and silk from the East. The most famous land trade route of the age was the
Silk Road, from China to Constantinople and the Levant. Camel and horse trains carried silks across
forbidding desert terrain in exchange for Western gold and silver.
89
Chapter VIII
T echnologies
Researching technology improves the abilities of your villagers,
soldiers, and buildings. For example, researching the Wheelbarrow
(at the Town Center) makes your villagers move faster and carry
more so they work more efficiently. Researching Scale Mail Armor
(at the Blacksmith) increases the armor of your infantry units so they
are harder to kill. Researching Town Watch (at the Town Center)
lets your buildings see the enemy from farther away so you have more
warning of their approach.
For more information about researching technology, see Chapter III.
Building technologies
Researching the following technologies improves your buildings,
walls, and towers.
Town Watch
Town Watch (at the Town Center) lets
your buildings see enemies from farther
away so you have more warning of their
approach.
Each town and community was responsible for its own defense for much of the
Middle Ages, relying on the local lord and his retinue of soldiers for protection. The
danger from bandits, raiders, or unfriendly neighbors was real. Communities
developed a town watch that scouted the nearby countryside regularly. The town
watch reported danger to give the community time to prepare what defense it could.
90 Chapter VIII - Technologies
Town Patrol
Town Patrol (at the Town Center) lets your buildings see
enemies from even farther away than Town Watch.
As communities grew they had more to defend and more resources with which to defend. The town watch
grew into a town patrol usually provided by the local lord as part of his responsibility for the community’s
safety. Town patrols ranged far from the community to crossing points or passes where enemies might appear.
Longer ranged patrols meant earlier warnings and more time for preparation against attack.
Masonry
Masonry (at the University) makes your buildings stronger so
they can take more damage in combat.
Europeans of the Dark Ages and later had to relearn the techniques of masonry exhibited by the Roman ruins
that surrounded them. Roman bridges and aqueducts stood for many centuries after the Roman Empire was
gone, but the barbarian immigrants could not repair or duplicate these structures. The craft of masonry was
gradually reclaimed and then advanced. The great achievements of European masonry in the Middle Ages
were the cathedrals that appeared across the region.
Architecture
Architecture (at the
University) makes your
buildings even stronger
than Masonry.
The rebirth of masonry allowed the architecture
of the Middle Ages to advance as well. New techniques for vaulting and support made possible the great
cathedrals that stand as icons for this age. The famous architectural feature of this age was the flying buttress.
This new element shifted part of the great weight of a cathedral’s roof onto supports outside the walls, allowing
great airy vaults to open over the center of the church. Massive load-bearing pillars left long open spaces
between which beautiful stained glass windows could be placed.
Treadmill Crane
Treadmill Crane (at the University) makes villagers construct
buildings faster.
The construction of castles, cathedrals, and other major building projects required the invention of new
techniques, as well as the re-discovery of ancient technologies. A critical tool known to the ancients but lost to
the Europeans of the Dark Ages was the crane. The simple crane was a long pole with block and tackle gear
that was used to pull loads to a height. The treadmill crane was an improvement over the simple version. It
91
used a large circular treadmill upon which men walked. Gears converted the horizontal circular motion into
vertical turning, providing power to wind ropes around a drum and pull up heavy loads. A variation of the
treadmill crane employed a capstan that men could push against, like those used on sailing ships to raise
anchors.
Hoardings
Hoardings (at the Castle) make your Castles stronger.
Men fighting from the top of sheer castle walls could not shoot or otherwise attack enemies at the base of the
wall without exposing themselves to arrows. Castles were improved with hoardings, which were fortifications
and crenellations that extended out from the tops of walls to protect defenders. They could now more safely
attack men below or those climbing up. Hoardings made castles more difficult to capture.
Economy & trade technologies
Researching the following technologies improves your economy and trading abilities.
Loom
Loom (at the Town Center) makes your villagers harder to kill.
The invention of the loom and the ability to weave cloth was an important ancient technolog y that was
quickly recovered during the Dark Ages. Good wool clothes were an important asset that lengthened life
expectancy in the Northern European climate. Raising sheep for wool and then making cloth was one of the
early important industries of the Middle Ages.
Wheelbarrow
Wheelbarrow (at the Town Center) makes your villagers move
faster and carry more resources so they work more efficiently.
The simple wheelbarrow, or one-wheeled hand cart, was a significant invention at a time when most people
worked with their hands in an agricultural community. There was little industry in the early part of the
Middle Ages. The economy was powered largely by people growing crops, herding livestock, gathering, and
building. The wheelbarrow provided an important productivity improvement.
92 Chapter VIII - Technologies
Hand Cart
Hand Cart (at the Town Center) makes villagers move faster
and carry more resources.
The hand cart or simple wagon pulled by a horse or other animal was an improvement in land transport and
boosted productivity. A man with a cart could carry the load of many men and more cheaply. The demand for
carts was a boost to the economy itself by creating jobs for horse breeders, harness makers, cart makers, and
wheelwrights.
Gold Mining
Gold Mining (at the Mining Camp) makes villagers mine gold
faster.
The search for gold and silver since ancient and even prehistoric times meant that by the Dark Ages there was
little of these precious metals to be found on the surface. To find more, it had to be mined from underground.
The technolog y of gold prospecting and gold mining advanced during the early part of the Middle Ages,
driven by the need for currency and demand for jewelry.
Gold Shaft Mining
Gold Shaft Mining (at the Mining Camp) makes villagers
mine gold even faster than Gold Mining.
When sources of gold and silver near the surface were exhausted, miners developed technolog y for going deep
underground. This involved building lifts to send men down and bring ore up. It required pumps to pull water
up and push air down. And it required new tunneling techniques for shoring up mine galleries and shafts to
prevent cave-ins. Some of the richest silver mines were found in Eastern Europe.
Stone Mining
Stone Mining (at the Mining Camp) makes villagers mine
stone faster.
The principal building material in Europe during the Dark Ages was wood, which was available in
abundance. Next most useful was stone salvaged from decaying Roman buildings that no one knew how to
repair. As civilization coalesced in this area once more, the construction trades revived and stone became more
desirable and affordable as a building material. Stone mining, or quarrying, required technolog y for making
stone-cutting tools and moving stone from the quarry to the building site.
93
Stone Shaft Mining
Stone Shaft Mining (at the Mining Camp) makes villagers
mine stone even faster than Stone Mining.
The demand for stone escalated rapidly when castles were being built across Europe, towns were being
fortified, and the increasingly wealthy Roman Catholic Church began building its great cathedrals. Stone
cutting became an important trade. New technolog y was needed to get to desirable stone because the easily
reached surface sources were rapidly exhausted in some areas.
Double-Bit Axe
Double-Bit Axe (at the Lumber Camp) makes villagers chop
wood faster.
The double-bit axe had blades, or bits, on both sides. It was a large, heavy axe that speeded the cutting of trees.
With two cutting edges, woodcutters could switch bits when one became dull and then sharpen both at the
same time. Cutters worked faster and more efficiently with the double-bit axe.
Bow Saw
Bow Saw (at the Lumber Camp) makes villagers chop wood
even faster than Double-Bit Axe.
The bow saw had a rounded handle like a bow with the saw blade connecting the bow ends. The bow saw was
a more precise tool than previous saws. Woodcutters using it got more usable wood from each tree by reducing
waste.
Two-Man Saw
Two-Man Saw (at the Lumber Camp) makes villagers chop
wood even faster than the Bow Saw.
The large two-man saw allowed two men to work together taking down a tree and increased the productivity
of both. One man pulled the saw toward him with both hands and cut the tree. The second man rested but kept
his hands on the saw. When the first man finished his pull, the second man pulled the saw back and the first
man rested. The two-man saw cut with each back and forth motion and had big teeth and cut deeply, bringing
trees down in quick time. Because each operator could use two hands when pulling, they could handle the large
size and pull.
Horse Collar
Horse Collar (at the Mill) increases the amount of food your
Farms produce before they go fallow and must be rebuilt.
94 Chapter VIII - Technologies
During the Dark Ages oxen were the prime source of animal power on farms, even though horses were
recognized as being stronger and easier to use. The available harnesses for horses, however, choked the animal,
and therefore seriously limiting its pulling power. A chest horse collar was invented in the East, possibly China,
and gradually worked its way to Europe. This was an important innovation for European farming because it
tremendously increased the pulling power of horses. This reduced the time needed to plow land and led to more
land being taken into cultivation.
Heavy Plow
Heavy Plow (at the Mill) increases the amount of food your
Farms produce even more than Horse Collar.
Following the implementation of the chest horse collar, the next important innovation for European farming
was the heavy plow. This was a large wood and metal plow that could bite deep into the dense, rich soil
deposited on the European plains following the last Ice Age. The heavy grasses in these areas defied previous
attempts to plow. The heavy plow pulled behind strong horses bred for power broke open these soils. This
opened vast tracks of land that proved very productive and greatly increased food production. Populations
climbed as a result.
Crop Rotation
Crop Rotation (at the Mill) increases the amount of food your
Farms produce even more than the Heavy Plow.
With experience over time farmers noted that food production gradually declined on fields where the same
crops were planted year after year. Experimentation showed that proper crop rotation could restore high yields.
Farmers of the Middle Ages did not understand the science of this result but developed a practical plan
through experience. Planting the same crops over and over depleted specific nutrients that a plant needed in
quantity. Through crop rotation, different plants were found to restore the nutrients needed by something else.
Alfalfa, for example, restores nitrogen to soil from which it has been depleted by other crops. Planting alfalfa
restored the soil for the next year and made good winter feed for livestock.
Coinage
Coinage (at the Market) decreases the cost of sending a tribute
of resources to another player.
Money degraded during the Dark Ages in Western Europe because the barbarian tribes that took control were
largely illiterate and had no system of government that could administer the making of coins. Those coins that
exist from this era are very crude copies of Roman coins and usually of low-value metals. The rise of
Charlemagne’s empire and other strong kings created the stable administrations that could successfully provide
coinage. A stable and available supply of money was a great boost to economic growth. The most useful
European coins were silver pennies, roughly the size of the modern U.S. 10-cent piece, and smaller denomina-
tions made of copper and bronze.
95
Banking
Banking (at the Market) eliminates the cost of sending a
tribute of resources to another player.
The loaning of money for interest, or usury, was long prohibited by the church in the West and this proved a
handicap for economic growth. The religious laws were avoided by a number of ploys, and non-Christians
were often allowed into a community to provide this service. Preaching a pogrom against money-lending Jews
or other non-Christians was a convenient way for more than one king to clear off a large debt. The religious
and political climate changed gradually, especially in the great trading cities of Italy where the first of many
great merchant banking firms came into existence.
Guilds
Guilds (at the Market) reduces the cost of buying and selling
resources at the Market.
Political and economic power during the Dark Ages was held by barbarian chiefs. This power eventually
shifted to kings, churchmen, and powerful nobles. Near the end of the Middle Ages the middle class of
townspeople grew more important and took a share of this power. One innovation of the middle class was the
creation of guilds. Guilds controlled a specific enterprise such as cloth trading, butchering, or iron making
within a town or region. They set the prices and determined who would work in the business. Outsiders were
blocked from working. In return for a monopoly, usually bought from the king or town, they provided a
superior product. Controlling trades through guilds resulted in high standards of living for guild members, a
quality product, and high prices.
Cartography
Cartography (at the Market) lets you share exploration and
unit line of sight with your allies so you see what they have
explored. (Before your allies can see what you have explored,
they must research Cartography, too.)
There was a revival of European learning after the Dark Ages that started mainly in the monasteries of the
Christian Church, particularly in Ireland. The west Europeans were far behind the educational standards of
the Byzantines, the Saracens, and the Chinese. Part of this revival was an interest in geography that became
even more pronounced when the Crusaders and adventurers brought back tales of exotic trade goods and
riches beyond the horizon. Kings and churchmen commissioned maps and cartography, the science of map
making, became a newly prized skill.
96 Chapter VIII - Technologies
Conscription
Conscription (at the Castle) decreases the time required to
create units at the Barracks, Stable, Archery Range, and
Castle.
Lords of the Middle Ages had the ability to call up
their vassals and the peasant militia for limited
service. Conscription was the next evolution in
acquiring men for military service. It
allowed a lord to put men into military
service for an extended period, not just a
few months of campaigning each year. In
some parts of the world, a man might be
conscripted for many years of service.
Sappers
Sappers (at the Castle)
increases the damage villagers cause when they attack
buildings.
Men who specialized in the techniques of attacking fortifications became known as sappers. They dug the
trenches to bring weapons up close and they undermined walls to cause their collapse. Armies without a
contingent of sappers were handicapped when attempting to take a castle or fortified town. Many sappers
worked as mercenaries for the highest bidder.
Spies
Spies (at the Castle) lets you see what your enemies have
explored and share their unit line of sight. You can purchase
the Spies technology for gold. By paying a fee dependent on
the number of enemy villagers in existence, you can learn the
exact location of each unit and building still in play.
In a Regicide game, this technology is called Treason. For information about the unique
role of Treason in a Regicide game, see Chapter II.
Advanced civilizations of any age gathered information about potential enemies as part of their foreign policy.
Much of this intelligence was gathered overtly through the normal channels of trade and diplomacy. Prudent
civilizations with hostile neighbors actively enlisted spies and informants to monitor enemy activity. During
the Middle Ages the Byzantines and Mongols were especially active in employing networks of agents among
their enemies. Spies gave early warning of enemy forces marshalling for attack or searched for weaknesses in
enemy defenses.
97
Infantry technologies
Researching the following technologies improves your infantry units.
Tracking
Tracking (at the Barracks) lets your infantry units see the
enemy from farther away.
As the Dark Ages passed and barbarian clans became trained armies, military techniques improved. The new
armies were better prepared for campaigning and maneuver. One result of these improvements was being less
susceptible to surprise and ambush.
Squires
Squires (at the Barracks) make your infantry units move faster.
Prior to becoming a knight, young men put in a long apprenticeship as a squire. Squires were assigned to a
knight for their training in weapons and social graces. In return they cared for the knight’s equipment and
horses, dressed him for combat, guarded him, and accompanied him into battle. All knights were squires at an
early age, but not all squires became knights. Squires without noble birth, financial backing, or the support of
superior lord might live out their life without becoming a knight. Squires fought alongside the knights,
although their weapons and armor were of a lower standard. The support of squires made armies more
effective.
Scale Mail Armor
Scale Mail Armor (at the Blacksmith) increases the armor of
your infantry units.
Scale mail armor was made of layers of rounded metal scales that overlapped each other in a cascade,
something like a covering of overlapping leaves. This partially protected the wearer from both missiles and
hand weapons. A blow against scale mail armor was partially deflected and the layers of scales absorbed much
of the energ y of the blow. Scale mail armor was an improvement over leather.
Chain Mail Armor
Chain Mail Armor (at Blacksmith) increases the armor of your
infantry units even more than Scale Mail Armor.
98 Chapter VIII - Technologies
Armor made of linked metal chains was an improvement over a cascade of metal scales. It had greater
integrity and held up better after taking some damage. Whereas a row of scales might come loose after a blow,
chain mail armor stayed largely intact. Because the linked chains were smaller than the scales they replaced,
chain mail armor was more flexible and comfortable to wear. While an improvement, chain mail armor was
also more expensive and time-consuming to manufacture.
Plate Mail Armor
Plate Mail Armor (at the Blacksmith) increases the armor of
your infantry units even more than Chain Mail Armor.
Armor made of large metal plates was the best defense obtainable against missiles and hand weapons. It was
stronger and absorbed more energ y. Large sheets of hammered steel were fashioned to fit the wearer’s body.
Making plate mail armor became an important craft. Specialists in Italy received orders for armor from all
over Europe. The booty from battle or tournaments included valuable armor. Armor required regular oiling to
prevent rust and this was the duty of squires indentured to knights. Plate mail armor appears ponderous today
but was actually reasonably light and well designed for mobility. Athletic knights could perform handstands
wearing armor. Knights could mount their horses without much difficulty and did not require cranes for a lift.
Forging
Forging (at the Blacksmith) increases the attack strength of
your infantry and cavalry units.
Iron tools and weapons were hammered out of iron bars through forging. The bars were heated in the forge
until they were red hot. At this point the metal could be shaped by hammering. The hot bar was held against
an anvil and pounded into the desired shape. In the hands of an expert smithy, the process of continually
heating, hammering, and cooling created quality tools and sharp, sturdy weapons. Men who worked the forges
were called blacksmiths because they worked with black iron and got quite dirty during a day’s work.
Iron Casting
Iron Casting (at the Blacksmith) increases the attack strength
of your infantry and cavalry units even more than Forging.
The ability to pour molten iron into a mold to create complicated shapes was called iron casting. This was
useful for making iron tools and weapons that could not be easily made by forging or to speed the process of
manufacturing. The secrets of iron casting were discovered in China many centuries before this technolog y
reached Europe. The ability to cast large metal objects became especially important when manufacturers were
trying to figure out how to make cannons.
99
Blast Furnace
Blast Furnace (at the Blacksmith) increases the attack strength
of your infantry and cavalry units even more than Iron
Casting.
The Saracens and later the Japanese made the first high-quality steel through the laborious process of folding
iron over and over and hammering it. A tremendous number of repetitions of this process removed a very
high percentage of impurities in the metal creating steel. The Saracens and Japanese were both known for the
sharpness and strength of their best swords. Innovators learned to speed the process of making steel through a
blast furnace. By blasting oxygen into the furnace when iron ore was being smelted, the temperature of the
mixture was raised and more impurities were burned off. The result was steel, a useful material for weapons
because it could hold a sharper point and did not fracture as easily as iron.
Missile/siege unit technologies
Researching the following technologies improves your archers and towers.
Fletching
Fletching (at the Blacksmith) increases the attack strength and
range of scorpions, Archery Range units, towers, Town Center,
Castle, and ships (except those using gunpowder weapons).
The provision of feathers or other wind foils at the rear of an arrow was called fletching and this innovation
improved the stability of an arrow in flight. Fletching increased the range and accuracy of the arrow. Well-
made arrows were essential to the success and effectiveness of archers.
Bodkin Arrow
Bodkin Arrow (at the Blacksmith) increases the attack
strength and range of scorpions, Archery Range units, towers,
Town Center, Castle, and ships (except those using gunpowder
weapons).
The bodkin arrow was an innovation that made archers of all types more effective against men wearing
armor. The bodkin was simply a straight point intended to puncture, rather than a typical broad point
intended to slice as it penetrated. The broad point was fine for hunting or use against unarmored targets, but
armor effectively dissipated its energ y. The bodkin concentrated its power in the point and could penetrate any
armor at a sufficiently short range. The English longbowmen at Agincourt lofted barrages of bodkin arrows
down upon the dense ranks of French knights. The bodkins, aided by the force of gravity, penetrated helmets,
shoulders, legs, and arms when they struck perpendicularly to the face of armor.
100 Chapter VIII - Technologies
Bracer
Bracer (at the Blacksmith) increases the attack strength and
range of scorpions, Archery Range units, towers, Town Center,
Castle, and ships (except those using gunpowder weapons).
The bracer was a hard leather guard worn on an archer’s forward hand. This improvement had the duel
advantage of supporting the wrist, which would grow quite weary after many shots, and protecting the inside
of the arm from the fletching of launched arrows. Without protection, the arm could be cut over the course of
many shots and weaken the archer to the point of taking him out of combat. The bracer was an important
improvement for archers that made them more effective.
Padded Archer Armor
Padded Archer Armor (at the Blacksmith) increases the armor
of your archers.
Archers and skirmishers were not expected to engage in hand-to-hand fighting so they rarely wore armor
early in the Middle Ages. They also needed flexibility of arm movement and might be required to move about
a battlefield quickly. When available, however, these troops would add protective clothing that did not interfere
significantly with their fighting ability. One early type of light armor was simply padded cloth, worn on the
torso, that provided some protection from blows or missiles.
Leather Archer Armor
Leather Archer Armor (at the Blacksmith) increases the armor
of your archers even more than Padded Archer Armor.
Padded armor for light troops was improved with an outer layer of leather over the cloth padding. Leather
was light and flexible but provided more protection than simple cloth.
Ring Archer Armor
Ring Archer Armor (at the Blacksmith) increases the armor of
your archers even more than Leather Archer Armor.
As the Middle Ages progressed, light troops were more aggressively employed in battle. They supported
pikemen phalanxes and were put into combined formations with these units. Crossbowmen needed to get close
to the enemy to shoot. During assaults on fortifications and castles, they were exposed to enemy fire. In
conjunction with their more aggressive roles, the armor that light troops wore was upgraded to ring, or chain
mail. This was the lightest and most flexible of the metal armors and minimized interference with fighting,
while providing better protection than padded leather.
101
Chemistry
Chemistry (at the University) increases the attack strength of
all non-gunpowder missile weapons. You must research
Chemistry to build gunpowder units (Bombard Tower,
Bombard Cannon, Hand Cannoneer, and Cannon Galleon).
After researching Chemistry, missile weapons fire flaming
arrows.
The science of chemistry was very crude during the Middle Ages and devoted almost entirely to finding ways
to convert base metals into gold. This study was called alchemy and practitioners were called alchemists.
Alchemists occasionally stumbled upon useful chemicals by accident. The most significant result of chemistry
experiments was the European acquisition of gunpowder, which had been invented many centuries earlier by
the Chinese.
Ballistics
Ballistics (at the University) improves how accurate scorpions,
archers, galleys, and towers are in hitting moving targets.
Missile weapons grew increasingly important as the Middle Ages proceeded, culminating in the development
of firearms and cannons. Before these innovative weapons there were longbows, crossbows, and a variety of
siege engines throwing rocks, spears, and arrows. Practical men studied how these missiles performed in flight
and worked to improve velocity and accuracy. This was the science of Ballistics, the study of the motion of
projectiles in flight. This experience led to improvements throughout the age as part of the arms race among
weapons, armor, fortification, attack, and defense.
Murder Holes
Murder Holes (at the University) eliminates the minimum
range of towers (except Bombard Towers) and Castles so they
can fire at soldiers attacking their base.
Hoardings were fortifications built at the top of castle walls and towers from which defenders could fight.
They needed to be beyond the vertical plane of the wall so they could attack enemies at the base of the wall. At
the bottom of the hoardings were trap doors called murder holes. These could be opened and defenders could
shoot arrows and drop stones, boiling water, or burning sand directly down. Without murder holes, enemies up
against the bottom of a wall were relatively safe.
Heated Shot
Heated Shot (at the University) increases the damage towers
cause to ships.
102 Chapter VIII - Technologies
Coastal gunners who engaged ships learned to heat their cannonballs in furnaces until they were red hot. If a
heated shot lodged in the woodwork of a sailing ship, it could set the ship afire. The wadding in the barrel of
the gun had to be sufficiently thick to not burn away before the cannon could be fired. If the shot burned
through the wadding too quickly, the gun could go off before being properly aimed. In such a case the gun
might explode rather than fire. Heated shot that plunged through decks was especially dangerous. It could
lodge deep in the ship where the crew could not reach it with water before fire had taken hold. If fire reached
the powder magazine, the ship would explode.
Siege Engineers
Siege Engineers (at the University) increases the damage siege
weapons cause to buildings as well as range.
Men who specialized in designing, building, and operating siege weapons were called siege engineers. These
weapons were marvels of their age and complicated to operate. Hitting a narrow stone wall from a distance
with a plunging stone shot was a difficult problem. Kings prized men who could solve it.
Cavalry technologies
Researching the following technologies improves your cavalry units. You can also research
Forging, Iron Casting, and Blast Furnace (at the Barracks) to increase the attack strength
of your cavalry units. For descriptions of these technologies, see “Infantry technologies”
earlier in this chapter.
Husbandry
Husbandry (at the Stable) increases the speed of all cavalry
units.
In an age dominated for centuries by knights, the breeding and provision of horses, a branch of animal
husbandry, became an important skill. Knights needed heavy chargers to carry them into battle but also
dependable lighter horses with stamina for campaigning in the country. Scouts and light cavalry needed fast
and nimble horses when traveling cross-country in enemy territory. Horse breeders of the Middle Ages selected
for these traits, and horses of different abilities were the result.
Scale Barding Armor
Scale Barding Armor (at the Blacksmith) increases the armor
of your cavalry units, including Cavalry Archers, Mangudai,
and War Elephants.
103
Barding was armor placed on horses. Scale barding armor was made of layers of rounded metal scales that
overlapped each other in a cascade. This partially protected the horse from both arrows and hand weapons. A
blow against the armor was partially deflected, and the layers of scales absorbed much of the energ y of the
blow.
Chain Barding Armor
Chain Barding Armor (at the Blacksmith) increases the armor
of your cavalry units even more than Scale Barding Armor.
Armor made of linked metal chains was an improvement over a cascade of metal scales. It had greater
integrity and held up better after taking some damage. Where a row of scales might come loose after a blow,
chain barding armor stayed largely intact. Because the linked chains were smaller than the scales they replaced,
Chain Armor was more flexible and comfortable to wear.
Plate Barding Armor
Plate Barding Armor (at the Blacksmith) increases the armor
of your cavalry units even more than Chain Barding Armor.
Armor made of large metal plates was the best defense obtainable against missiles and hand weapons. It was
stronger and absorbed more energ y. Large sheets of hammered steel were fashioned to fit the body of the horse.
Monk technologies
Researching the following technologies improves
your Monks.
Fervor
Fervor (at the Monastery) makes
your Monks move faster.
The strongest religions inspire great passion and fervor among their faithful. The result is a high degree of
commitment and effort, especially among the teachers and interpreters of the group.
Sanctity
Sanctity (at the Monastery) increases the hit points of your
Monks.
104 Chapter VIII - Technologies
To achieve sanctity was to achieve a holiness of life and character. The holy men of the great religions of the
Middle Ages strove for sanctity through their obedience to sacred texts, their vows of poverty, and their respect
for all living things. Through sanctity they inspired those of other religions or those less committed.
Redemption
Redemption (at the Monastery) lets your Monks convert
enemy buildings (except Town Centers, Castles, Monasteries,
Farms, Fish Traps, walls, towers, Gates, and Wonders) and
siege weapons. Monks can convert most enemy units from a
distance; however, they must stand adjacent to buildings, rams,
and Trebuchets.
The ability of someone fallen from the faith to redeem himself or herself was a powerful act of forgiveness on
the part of a religion. Religions that were forgiving and allowed redemption had an advantage over those that
did not.
Atonement
Atonement (at the Monastery) lets your Monks convert
enemy Monks.
Several of the most successful religions reach an atonement, or reconciliation, between their all-powerful god
and the common men and women on Earth. This was an important feature that strengthened the faith of
believers and attracted converts.
Illumination
Illumination (at the Monastery) decreases the time your
Monks need to rest before attempting another conversion.
The strength of any religion is its ideas and the faith that these ideas encourage. The message and spread of
these ideas can be enhanced by their presentation. During the Middle Ages religions used icons, impressive
churches, music, and artwork to help spread and strengthen their message. Enduring symbols of this effort
from the Middle Ages are the illuminated manuscripts copied laboriously by hand in the Scriptoria of isolated
monasteries.
Faith
Faith (at the Monastery) makes your units harder for enemy
Monks to convert.
Civilizations can conflict ideologically, as well as militarily and economically. When the Christian Crusaders
invaded the Holy Lands, for example, they encountered the ideas of Islam, as well as new weapons, tactics, and
desirable goods.
105
Block Printing
Block Printing (at the Monastery) lets your Monks convert
enemy units from farther away.
Block printing, an old Chinese invention, made possible the printing press, one of the great inventions of the
Middle Ages. This made possible the wide dissemination and easy storage of information on an amazing scale
that continues to accelerate today. The first book printed was the Christian Bible. The important texts of other
religions soon followed.
Ship technologies
Researching the following technologies improves your ships.
Careening
Careening (at the Dock) increases the pierce armor of ships
and the number of units Transport Ships can carry.
Barnacles and seaweed attached themselves to the underside of wooden hulled ships over time. These
“passengers” slowed the ship down as they spread across the hull, making the ships ever more inefficient. Ships
of the age were careened periodically to scrap off these obstructions and reseal the bottom. Careening required
unloading the ship, dragging it up onto a sandy beach sideways, and pulling it over to expose the bottom.
Crewmen worked in shallow water scraping and resealing seams with new pitch. Careening was usually done
in conjunction with tides to help float the ship off, and a ship needed to be careened twice to be cleaned on both
sides.
Dry Dock
Dry Dock (at the Dock) makes your ships faster and increases
the number of units Transport Ships can carry.
Ships needing extensive repairs were sailed into a new structure called a dry dock from which the water could
be pumped. This left the ship dry and accessible to workmen from all directions.
Shipwright
Shipwright (at the Dock) decreases the amount of wood
required to build ships.
Men who built and designed ships were called shipwrights. Their value to sea coast communities increased as
the demand for sea trade and war ships increased. Expert shipwrights built sturdier ships at a lower cost.
106 Chapter VIII - Technologies
Appendix
Building Attributes
Building Attributes
Cost: W=wood, S=stone, G=gold
ECONOMIC AGE COST HIT PTS ATTACK GARRISON RANGE
Town Center III 275W 2400 5 15 6
House I 30W 900 0 0 0
Mill I 100W 1000 0 0 0
Mining Camp I 100W 1000 0 0 0
Lumber Camp I 100W 1000 0 0 0
Dock I 150W 1800 0 10* 0
Farm I 60W 480 0 0 0
Fish Trap II 100W 50 0 0 0
Market II 175W 2100 0 0 0
Blacksmith II 150W 2100 0 0 0
Monastery III 175W 2100 0 10* 0
University III 200W 2100 0 0 0
Wonder IV 1000 W, S, G 4800 0 0 0
MILITARY
Barracks I 175W 1200 0 10* 0
Stable II 175W 1500 0 10* 0
Archery Range II 175W 1500 0 10* 0
Castle III 650S 4800 11 20 8
Siege Workshop III 200W 2100 0 10* 0
Gate II 30S 2750 0 0 0
Palisade Wall I 2W 250 0 0 0
Stone Wall II 5S 1800 0 0 0
Fortified Wall III 5S 3000 0 0 0
Outpost I 25W, 25S 500 0 0 0
Watch Tower II 125S, 25W 1020 5 5 8
Guard Tower III 125S, 25W 1500 6 5 8
Keep IV 125S, 25W 2250 7 5 8
Bombard Tower IV 125S, 100G 2220 120 5 8
* Units can be garrisoned here only if a gather point is set on the building
while units are being created. They cannot reenter once ungarrisoned.
Units garrisoned in towers, Town Centers, and Castles add attack and range.
107
INFANTRY
Militia Unit Attributes
Unit Attributes
Cost
Hit Pts
Attack
Armor
60F, 20G 40 4 0/0 0 S
Range
Speed
Special
Man-at-Arms 60F, 20G 45 6 0/0 0 M Attack bonus vs. buildings
Long Swordsman 60F, 20G 55 9 0/0 0 M Attack bonus vs. buildings
2H Swordsman 60F, 20G 60 11 0/0 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings
Champion 60F, 20G 70 13 1/0 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings
Spearman 35F, 25W 45 3 0/0 0 M Attack bonus vs. cavalry, War Elephants
Pikeman 35F, 25W 55 4 1/0 0 M Attack bonus vs. cavalry, War Elephants
Berserk 65F, 25G 48 9 0/0 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings; heals over time
Elite Berserk 65F, 25G 60 14 2/0 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings; heals over time
Samurai 60F, 30G 60 8 1/0 0 S Attack bonus vs. other unique units, buildings
Elite Samurai 60F, 30G 80 12 1/0 0 S Attack bonus vs. other unique units, buildings
Teutonic Knight 85F, 40G 70 12 5/2 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings
Elite Teutonic Knight 85F, 40G 100 17 10/2 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings
Throwing Axeman 55F, 25G 50 7 0/0 3 S Attack bonus vs. buildings; ranged attack
E Throwing Axeman 55F, 25G 60 8 1/0 4 S Attack bonus vs. buildings; ranged attack
Woad Raider 65F, 25G 65 8 0/0 0 M Attack bonus vs. buildings
Elite Woad Raider 65F, 25G 80 13 0/0 0 M Attack bonus vs. buildings
Huskarl 80F, 40G 60 10 0/4 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings, archers
Elite Huskarl 80F, 40G 70 12 0/6 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings, archers
ARCHERS
Archer 25W, 45G 30 4 0/0 4 M
Crossbowman 25W, 45G 35 5 0/0 5 M
Arbalest 25W, 45G 40 6 0/0 5 M
Skirmisher 25F, 35W 30 2 0/3 4 M Attack bonus vs. archers
Elite Skirmisher 25F, 35W 35 3 0/4 5 M Attack bonus vs. archers
Cavalry Archer 40W, 70G 50 6 0/0 3 F
Hvy Cav Archer 40W, 70G 60 7 1/0 4 F
Hand Cannoneer 45F, 50G 35 17 1/0 7 M Requires Chemistry
Chu Ko Nu 40W, 35G 45 8 0/0 4 M Multiple fires between reloads
Elite Chu Ko Nu 40W, 35G 50 8 0/0 4 M Multiple fires between reloads
Janissary 60F, 55G 35 15 1/0 8 M
Elite Janissary 60F, 55G 40 18 2/0 8 M
Longbowman 35W, 40G 35 6 0/0 5 M
Elite Longbowman 35W, 40G 40 7 0/1 6 M
Mangudai 55W, 65G 60 6 0/0 4 F Attack bonus vs. siege weapons
Elite Mangudai 55W, 65G 60 8 1/0 4 F Attack bonus vs. siege weapons
OTHER UNITS
Villager 50F 25 3 0/0 0 S Builds, repairs buildings; gathers resources;
adds attack to buildings when garrisoned
Monk 100G 30 0 0/0 9 S Converts units; heals at range
Trade Cart 100W, 50G 70 0 0/0 0 M Trades with other Markets
108 Appendix - Unit Attributes
Speed: S=slow, M=medium, F=fast
Cost: F=food, W=wood, S=stone, G=gold
CAVALRY
Cost
Hit Pts
Attack
Armor
Scout Cavalry 80F 45 3 0/2 0 M
Range
Speed
Special
Light Cavalry 80F 60 7 0/2 0 F
Knight 60F, 75G 100 10 2/2 0 F
Cavalier 60F, 75G 120 12 2/2 0 F
Paladin 60F, 75G 160 14 2/3 0 F
Camel 55F, 60G 100 5 0/0 0 F Attack bonus vs. cavalry
Heavy Camel 55F, 60G 120 7 0/0 0 F Attack bonus vs. cavalry
Cataphract 70F, 75G 110 9 2/1 0 F Attack bonus vs. infantry
Elite Cataphract 70F, 75G 150 12 2/1 0 F Attack bonus vs. infantry
War Elephant 200F, 75G 450 15 1/2 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings
Elite War Elephant 200F, 75G 600 20 1/3 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings
Mameluke 55F, 85G 65 7 0/0 3 F Attack bonus vs. cavalry
Elite Mameluke 55F, 85G 80 8 1/0 3 F Attack bonus vs. cavalry
SIEGE
Scorpion 75W, 75G 40 12 0/6 5 S Bolts damage all they touch
Heavy Scorpion 75W, 75G 50 16 0/7 5 S Bolts damage all they touch
Bombard Cannon 225W, 225G 50 40 2/5 12 S Requires Chemistry; min. range;
attack bonus vs. buildings, ships
Battering Ram 160W, 75G 175 2 0/180 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings
Capped Ram 160W, 75G 200 3 0/190 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings
Siege Ram 160W, 75G 270 4 0/195 0 S Attack bonus vs. buildings
Mangonel 160W, 135G 50 40 0/6 7 S Area of effect damage
Onager 160W, 135G 60 50 0/7 8 S Area of effect damage
Siege Onager 160W, 135G 70 75 0/8 8 S Area of effect damage
Trebuchet (packed) 200W, 200G 150 0 2/8 0 S
Trebuchet (unpacked) 200W, 200G 150 200 1/150 16 S Attack bonus vs. buildings, ships
SHIPS
Fishing Ship 75W 60 0 0/4 0 M Harvests fish; builds Fish Traps
Trade Cog 100W, 50G 80 0 0/6 0 F Trades with other Docks
Transport Ship 125W 100 0 4/8 0 F Carries land units
Galley 90W, 30G 120 6 0/6 5 F
War Galley 90W, 30G 135 7 0/6 6 F
Galleon 90W, 30G 165 8 0/8 7 F
Fire Ship 75W, 45G 100 2 0/6 2 F
Fast Fire Ship 75W, 45G 120 3 0/8 2 F
Demolition Ship 70W, 50G 50 110 0/3 0 F Explodes, damaging everything nearby; attack bonus vs. buildings
Heavy Demo Ship 70W, 50G 60 140 0/5 0 F Explodes, damaging everything nearby
Cannon Galleon 200W, 150G 120 35 0/6 13 M Requires Chemistry; min. range; attack bonus vs. buildings
E Cannon Galleon 200W, 150G 150 45 0/8 15 M Min. range; attack bonus vs. buildings
Longboat 100W, 50G 130 7 0/6 6 F Fire multiple arrows
Elite Longboat 100W, 50G 160 8 0/8 7 F Fire multiple arrows
109
Technology Costs & Benefits
Technology Costs & Benefits
BUILDING TECHNOLOGIES
Town Watch II 75F +4 building LOS
Town Patrol III 300F, 200G +4 building LOS
Masonry III 175W, 150S Increases building HPs/armor
Architecture IV 200W, 300S Increases building HPs/armor
Treadmill Crane III 200W, 300S +20% villager build speed
Hoardings IV 400W, 400S +1000 Castle HPs
ECONOMY & TRADE TECHNOLOGIES
Loom I 50G +15 villager HPs; +1/+1P armor
Wheelbarrow II 175F, 50W +10% villager speed; +25% villager capacity
Hand Cart III 300F, 200W +10% villager speed; +50% villager capacity
Gold Mining II 100F, 75W +15% gold-mining speed
Gold Shaft Mining III 200F, 150W +15% gold-mining speed
Stone Mining II 100F, 75W +15% stone-mining speed
Stone Shaft Mining III 200F, 150W +15% stone-mining speed
Double-Bit Axe II 100F, 50W +20% wood-chopping speed
Bow Saw III 150F, 100W +20% wood-chopping speed
Two-Man Saw IV 300F, 200W +10% wood-chopping speed
Horse Collar II 75F, 75W Farm +75 food
Heavy Plow III 125F, 125W Farm +125 food; +1 villager food capacity
Crop Rotation IV 250F, 250W Farm +175 food
Coinage II 150F, 50G Decreases tribute fee to 20%
Banking III 200F, 100G No tribute fee
Guilds IV 300F, 200G Decreases trading fee to 15%
Cartography II 100F, 100G See ally LOS and exploration
Conscription IV 150F, 150G +33% unit creation speed at Barracks, Stable,
Archery Range, Castle
Spies/Treason IV 200G/enemy See enemy LOS and exploration/see enemy
villager; 400G/use Kings’ locations
Sappers IV 400F, 200G Villagers +15 attack vs. buildings
MONK TECHNOLOGIES
Fervor III 140G +15% Monk speed
Sanctity III 120G +50% Monk HPs
Redemption III 475G Convert buildings (except walls, Gates,
Town Centers, Monasteries, Castles, Farms,
Fish Traps, Wonders), all siege units
Atonement III 325G Convert other Monks
Illumination IV 120G +50% Monk rejuvenation speed
Faith IV 750F, 1000G +50% conversion resistance
Block Printing IV 200G +3 conversion range
110 Appendix - Technology Costs & Benefits Cost: F=food, W=wood, S=stone, G=gold
INFANTRY TECHNOLOGIES
Tracking II 75F +2 infantry LOS
Squires III 200F +10% infantry speed
Scale Mail Armor II 100F +1/+1P infantry armor
Chain Mail Armor III 200F, 100G +1/+1P infantry armor
Plate Mail Armor IV 300F, 150G +1/+2P infantry armor
Forging II 150F +1 infantry/cavalry attack
Iron Casting III 220F, 120G +1 infantry/cavalry attack
Blast Furnace IV 275F, 225G +2 infantry/cavalry attack
MISSILE/SIEGE TECHNOLOGIES
Fletching II 100F, 50G +1 attack/range for archers, galleys, Longboats,
Town Centers, Castles, towers
Bodkin Arrow III 200F, 100G +1 attack/range for archers, galleys, Longboats,
Town Centers, Castles, towers
Bracer IV 300F, 200G +1 attack/range for archers, galleys, Longboats,
Town Centers, Castles, towers
Padded Archer Armor II 100F +1/+1P archer armor
Leather Archer Armor III 150F, 150G +1/+1P archer armor
Ring Archer Armor IV 250F, 250G +1/+2P archer armor
Ballistics III 300W, 175G Track moving units
Murder Holes III 200F, 200S No minimum tower/Castle range
Heated Shot III 350F, 100G +50% tower attack vs. ships
Chemistry IV 300F, 200G +1 missile attack (except gunpowder units);
enables gunpowder units to be researched
Siege Engineers IV 500F, 600W +1 siege range (except rams); +20% siege unit
attack vs. buildings
CAVALRY TECHNOLOGIES
Husbandry III 250F +10% cavalry speed
Scale Barding Armor II 150F +1/+1P cavalry armor
Chain Barding Armor III 250F, 150G +1/+1P cavalry armor
Plate Barding Armor IV 350F, 200G +1/+2P cavalry armor
SHIP TECHNOLOGIES
Careening III 250F, 150G +1P armor; +5 Transport Ship capacity
Dry Dock IV 600F, 400G +15% ship speed; +10 Transport Ship capacity
Shipwright IV 1000F, 300G -20% wood to build ship
